<h4>To the Memory</h4>
<h4>of</h4>
<h4>Charles Baudelaire</h4>
<hr class="chap">
<p style="margin-left: 20%; font-weight: bold;"><a id="PRELUDE"/>PRELUDE</p>
<p style="font-style: italic; margin-left: 20%;">
I am a little tired of all things mortal;<br/>
I see through half-shut eyelids languorous<br/>
The old monotonous<br/>
Gold sun set slowly through the western portal,<br/>
Where I recline upon my deep dîwân,<br/>
In Ispahân.<br/>
<br/>
I am a little weary of the Persian<br/>
Girl that I lov'd; I am quite tir'd of love;<br/>
And I am weary of<br/>
The smoking censers, and the sweet diversion<br/>
Of stroking Leila's jasmine-scented hair,<br/>
I thought so fair.<br/>
<br/>
At last I think I am quite tired of beauty;<br/>
Why do the stars shine always in the sky?<br/>
I think if I might die,<br/>
Something more sweet, less tiring than the duty<br/>
Of kissing her, might be; I am tired of myrrh,<br/>
And kissing her.<br/>
<br/>
Khaled, come, come, and slowly move the scented<br/>
Gold narghilé away; let the lyres cease.<br/>
And now a little peace!<br/>
For see, moon-faced Leila hath repented<br/>
Of singing Hafiz' songs melodiously,<br/>
And languidly.<br/>
<br/>
Surely all things are vain, and great thanksgiving<br/>
Is due not; surely all things now are vain;<br/>
And all my heart is fain<br/>
Of something, something, far too great for living;<br/>
Nothing is very sad, nor wonderful,<br/>
Nor beautiful.<br/>
<br/>
Well now, since all things are not worth the winning,<br/>
Goodbye! With these I have a little play'd;<br/>
And once, alas, I pray'd<br/>
That gorgeous, golden sins be mine for sinning;<br/>
But now I would not leave my palanquin<br/>
For any sin.<br/>
<br/>
And long ago I prov'd in great compassion<br/>
For man, that Brahm is not nor ever was;<br/>
But now, alas, alas<br/>
<br/>
I would he were, that in the olden fashion<br/>
I might laugh once again ere all is said;<br/>
But Brahm is dead.<br/>
<br/>
Then with philosophy I bor'd me duly;<br/>
And since I could not slumber all the time,<br/>
I, in sweet golden rhyme,<br/>
On white papyrus scented with patchouli<br/>
Wrote masterpieces starry-beautiful.<br/>
The earth was full.<br/>
<br/>
So beauty wearied me; in order slowly<br/>
Love, Joy, and Victory came unto me;<br/>
I kiss'd them languidly;<br/>
And Virtue came, and Duty, stiff and holy;<br/>
To these I said—Pray come another day;<br/>
And turn'd away.<br/>
<br/>
Now since of all I am a little weary,<br/>
And since on earth I must a while sojourn,<br/>
And since a while must burn<br/>
The censer of my long existence dreary,<br/>
All things shall walk, that own my mastery,<br/>
In luxury.<br/>
<br/>
My Ennui shall in vestments falling lowly,<br/>
Stiff, purple, trailing, long, episcopal<br/>
Sweep through her palace hall,<br/>
Like to a consecrated bishop holy;<br/>
My Sin from golden goblets of Byzant<br/>
Shall drink absinthe.<br/>
<br/>
And my gold-crowned wanton goddess Pleasure,<br/>
(My candles are all burning at her shrine)<br/>
Shall be made drunk with wine,<br/>
And walk unto the velvet-falling measure<br/>
Of golden-voiced, solemn-sounding shawms.<br/>
No rhyme for shawms.<br/>
<br/>
All they that wait upon me in my glory,<br/>
My purple Pride, and my Luxuriousness,<br/>
And my Voluptuousness,<br/>
Shall show within their faces transitory<br/>
Something more subtile than all life can give,<br/>
While I shall live....<br/>
<br/>
Ah, all is liv'd, all eaten, all is drunken!<br/>
Soul, is there anything now left for thee<br/>
Excepting sanctity?<br/>
<br/>
Nay, ev'n we too have been in virtue sunken,<br/>
We have been holy priest, we have confess'd,<br/>
Said, <span style="font-style: normal;">Missa Est</span>.<br/>
<br/>
I have drunk out of heavy goblets golden,<br/>
As from some hellish tabernaculum<br/>
Cannabis, conium;<br/>
I know quite all the poisons, all the olden<br/>
Sins, all the ténébreux dark secrets hid,<br/>
And things forbid.<br/>
<br/>
I have had all things unto mortals given,<br/>
I all the women, all the passion I,<br/>
All the satiety;<br/>
I have had all the pleasures known in heaven,<br/>
Paradisiacal, purpureal,<br/>
Exstatical.<br/>
<br/>
With all the sciences I am acquainted,<br/>
Alas! I know quite all the languages,<br/>
All the philosophies,<br/>
Alas! and all the pictures that are painted,<br/>
And all the palac'd capitals that be<br/>
Have wearied me.<br/>
<br/>
Alas, all art, all knowledge, and all passion<br/>
I have had: I have heard all the symphonies;<br/>
I have sail'd all the seas;<br/>
I have drain'd all life's cup in languid fashion;<br/>
And I am come to Persia again,<br/>
Land of cocagne.<br/>
</p>
<hr class="chap"/>
<h3>THE BOOK OF JADE</h3>
<h4><a id="PART_ONE"/>PART ONE</h4>
<hr class="tb"/>
<p style="margin-left: 20%;">
<span style="font-size: 0.8em;"><a id="ASHTORETH"/>ASHTORETH</span><br/>
<br/>
<br/>
In thy blue pallid gown that shimmereth<br/>
So pale thou standest in the wan moonlight,<br/>
Where the gold censer near thy body white<br/>
Wraps thee around with its perfumed breath;<br/>
<br/>
So wan thy high tiara glimmereth<br/>
Above thy mystical far eyes of light,<br/>
Thou seemest some dead goddess of the night,<br/>
O starry love, O changeless Ashtoreth.<br/>
<br/>
Pallid thou standest in thy divinity,<br/>
Like some moon-idol of the buried time,<br/>
Before whose face priests sing in solemn chime.<br/>
<br/>
So I prostrate before thy deity,<br/>
Unto thy face have solemn praises sung,<br/>
And in my hands a golden censer swung.<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<span style="font-size: 0.8em;"><a id="PARFAIT_AMOUR"/>PARFAIT AMOUR</span><br/>
<br/>
<br/>
It is not that thy face is fair<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">As dying sunsets are,</span><br/>
Nor that thy lovely eyelids wear<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">The splendour of a star;</span><br/>
Tis the deep sadness of thine eyes<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Hath my heart captive led,</span><br/>
And that within thy soul I prize<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">The calmness of the dead.</span><br/>
<br/>
O holy love, O fair white face,<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">O sweet lost soul of thine!</span><br/>
Thy bosom is an altar-place,<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Thy kisses holy wine;</span><br/>
Sweet incense offer'd for my bliss<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Is thy corrupted breath,</span><br/>
And on thy stained lips I kiss<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">The holy lips of Death!</span><br/>
<br/>
Wherefore because thy heart is all<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Fill'd full of mournfulness,</span><br/>
And thy gold head as with a pall<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Hung o'er with sinfulness;</span><br/>
Because thy soul is utterly<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Sinful unto the core—</span><br/>
Therefore my heart is bound to thee,<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Dear love, forevermore!</span><br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<span style="font-size: 0.8em;"><a id="OPIUM"/>OPIUM</span><br/>
<br/>
Naught is more sweet than gently to let dream<br/>
The pallid flower of life asleep alway;<br/>
Where the dim censer sends up far from day<br/>
Unceasingly its still-ascending stream,<br/>
<br/>
O where the air winds its myrrh-scented steam<br/>
About thy naked body's disarray,<br/>
Shall not today's gold to thy shut eyes seem<br/>
Born and forgot in the dead ages gray?<br/>
<br/>
Sunk from life's mournful loud processional,<br/>
For thee shall not with high uplifted urn<br/>
The Night pour out dreams that awake and say,<br/>
<br/>
—We were, O pallid maiden vesperal,<br/>
Before the world; we also in our turn<br/>
By the vain morning gold scatter'd away.<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<span style="font-size: 0.8em;"><a id="SOMBRE_SONNET"/>SOMBRE SONNET</span><br/>
<br/>
<br/>
I love all sombre and autumnal things,<br/>
Regal and mournful and funereal,<br/>
Things strange and curious and majestical,<br/>
Whereto a solemn savor of death clings:<br/>
<br/>
Coerulian serpents mark'd with azure rings;<br/>
Awful cathedrals where rich shadows fall;<br/>
Hoarse symphonies sepulchral as a pall;<br/>
Mad crimes adorn'd with bestial blazonings.<br/>
<br/>
Therefore I love thee more than aught that dies,<br/>
Within whose subtile beauty slumbereth<br/>
The twain solemnity of life and death;<br/>
<br/>
Therefore I sit beside thee far from day<br/>
And look into thy holy eyes alway,<br/>
Thy desolate eyes, thine unillumin'd eyes.<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<span style="font-size: 0.8em;"><a id="LANGUOR"/>LANGUOR</span><br/>
<br/>
<br/>
Although thy face be whiter than the dawn,<br/>
Fairer than aught the dawning hath descried,<br/>
Hast thou not now, O dear love deified,<br/>
Enough of kisses upon thy forehead wan?<br/>
<br/>
The days and nights, like beads to pray upon,<br/>
Pass by before our eyes and not abide,<br/>
And so these things shall be till we have died,<br/>
Until our bodies to the earth are gone.<br/>
<br/>
I think how pleasant such a thing must be,<br/>
That all thy lovely limbs should fall away,<br/>
And drop to nothing in their soft decay.<br/>
<br/>
Then may thy buried body turn to me,<br/>
With new love on thy changed lips like fire,<br/>
And kiss me with a kiss that shall not tire.<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<span style="font-size: 0.8em;"><a id="ENNUI"/>ENNUI</span><br/>
<br/>
<br/>
I sat in tall Gomorrah on a day,<br/>
Boring myself with solitude and dreams,<br/>
When, like strange priests, with sacerdotal tread,<br/>
The seven mortal sins, in rich array,<br/>
<br/>
Came in and knelt: one old, and weak, and gray,<br/>
One that was shrouded like a person dead,<br/>
And one whose robes cast reddish-purple gleams<br/>
Upon her scornful face at peace alway.<br/>
<br/>
They swung before me amschirs of strange gold,<br/>
And one most beautiful began to pray,<br/>
Dreamily garmented in pallid blue.<br/>
<br/>
But I said only—I have dream'd of you.<br/>
Naught really is; all things are very old,<br/>
And very foolish. Please to go away.<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<span style="font-size: 0.8em;"><a id="LITANY"/>LITANY</span><br/>
<br/>
<br/>
All the authors that there are bore Me;<br/>
All the philosophies bore Me;<br/>
All the statues and all the temples bore Me;<br/>
<br/>
—All the authors that there are bore Thee;<br/>
All the philosophies bore Thee;<br/>
All the statues and all the temples bore Thee.<br/>
<br/>
All the women of the earth weary Me;<br/>
The fruit of the vine wearieth Me;<br/>
All the symphonies weary Me.<br/>
<br/>
—All the women of the earth weary Thee;<br/>
The fruit of the vine wearieth Thee;<br/>
All the symphonies weary Thee.<br/>
<br/>
Victory and defeat fatigue Me;<br/>
Gladness and sorrowing fatigue Me;<br/>
Life and death fatigue Me.<br/>
<br/>
—Victory and defeat fatigue Thee;<br/>
Gladness and sorrowing fatigue Thee;<br/>
Life and death fatigue Thee.<br/>
<br/>
The earth and the heavens weary Me;<br/>
The sun by day and the moon by night weary Me;<br/>
All the great stars of heaven weary Me.<br/>
<br/>
—The earth and the heavens weary Thee;<br/>
The sun by day and the moon by night weary Thee;<br/>
All the great stars of heaven weary Thee.<br/>
<br/>
The glorious company of the Apostles tireth Me;<br/>
The goodly fellowship of the Prophets tireth Me;<br/>
The noble army of Martyrs tireth Me.<br/>
<br/>
—The glorious company of the Apostles tireth Thee<br/>
The goodly fellowship of the Prophets tireth Thee;<br/>
The noble army of Martyrs tireth Thee.<br/>
<br/>
All the race of men weary Me;<br/>
The Cherubim and the Seraphim weary Me;<br/>
Myself wearieth Me.<br/>
<br/>
—All the race of men weary Thee;<br/>
The Cherubim and the Seraphim weary Thee;<br/>
Thyself wearieth Thee.<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<span style="font-size: 0.8em;"><a id="HARVARD"/>HARVARD</span><br/>
<br/>
<span style="font-size: 0.8em;">ON HIS TWENTY-FIRST YEAR</span><br/>
<br/>
<br/>
Tired Muse, put faded roses on thy brow,<br/>
Put thy bare arms about the harp, and sing:<br/>
—I am a little bor'd with everything.<br/>
Past the clos'd jalousies the mlengkas go;<br/>
<br/>
They are not beautiful; no Greek they know;<br/>
They go about and howl and make a fuss;<br/>
I gaze through <i>sâd</i>-shap'd eyelids languorous,<br/>
Far off from Ispahân where roses blow.<br/>
<br/>
Professors sit on lofty stools upcurl'd,<br/>
Through Yankee noses drooling all day long;<br/>
I find all these things quite ridiculous.<br/>
<br/>
Before despis'd old age comes over us,<br/>
Let us step into the great world ere long.<br/>
We shall be very grand in the great world!<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<span style="font-size: 0.8em;"><a id="PRIDE"/>PRIDE</span><br/>
<br/>
<br/>
They come and go, they pass before my soul,<br/>
Desire and Love, weak Anguish and Distress,<br/>
Shame and Despair: in phantom crowds they press,<br/>
Life's poor processional, Time's lowly dole.<br/>
<br/>
Mournful their voices as slow bells that toll,<br/>
Voices of them that curse and do not bless;<br/>
Ineffable things wrapp'd round with loathsomeness,<br/>
The deeds that I have done in Fate's control.<br/>
<br/>
They leer and moan, they shriek and threat and lower,<br/>
Ignoble faces that the sky do mar;<br/>
My changeless soul from her high pride of power<br/>
<br/>
Looks down unmov'd. So the calm evening star<br/>
Upon the wallowing peaceless sea looks down,<br/>
Set far aloft within the heaven's crown.<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<span style="font-size: 0.8em;"><a id="SONG_OF_GOLDEN_YOUTH"/>SONG OF GOLDEN YOUTH</span><br/>
<br/>
<br/>
Quelle bêtise! O Muse, no longer lappt in sadness let us lie,<br/>
Bring the jars of old Falernum, bring the roses ere they die!<br/>
I love laughter, I love kisses, I love Lili, I love love,<br/>
But these dingy funeral dirges ennuyer us by-and-by;<br/>
Fellows, disinvoltamente, when the lords of life depart,<br/>
Lift the wine-cup to your haughty lips, and sing, Good-bye, goodbye!<br/>
We have laughter on our lips, and in our hearts the laughing spring,<br/>
Nothing greatly can afflict us, nor our spirits mortify;<br/>
All the laws and regulations under scornful feet we tread,<br/>
We laugh loud at all the virtues underneath the shining sky;<br/>
I have heard, when haughty Tarquin did his horrid deed of sin,<br/>
That Lucretia's lily fingers slapp'd his face vivaciously;<br/>
Though of all my life dear Lili make a gay dégringolade,<br/>
Yet to my ennuis doth Lili sing an endless lullaby;<br/>
We are Greeks and we are Tartars, we know all the languages,<br/>
To the girls of Persia, India, China, we know how to sigh;<br/>
If the heartless heart of Lili tediously cruel prove,<br/>
Go and dance the tarantella with the girls of Hôkusai!<br/>
In the golden-citied world from Paris unto Tokiô<br/>
We are quite at home, we saunter languidly through tall Shanghai;<br/>
Chairete! the shaw of rosy Persia is a gentleman,<br/>
Charming people in Benares where the Ganges loiters by;<br/>
Allah akbar! O great world, O golden-tower'd cities gay,<br/>
Into all your gates with laughter and with roses enter I!<br/>
<br/>
Kalliste, your Persian ghazal cease to sing: the sun is low,<br/>
And the sacred hour of absinthe now is very very nigh.<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<span style="font-size: 0.8em;"><a id="MAIS_MOI_JE_VIS_LA_VIE_EN_ROUGE"/>MAIS MOI JE VIS LA VIE EN ROUGE</span><br/>
<br/>
<br/>
Your soul is like a purple flower,<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Mary, whose eyes are amethyst,</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Whose lips are like red wine when kist,</span><br/>
With sweet life and sweet death for dower;<br/>
There are who will have none of these,<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Who walk in peace all day upright,</span><br/>
And in the night pray on their knees—<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">The pleasures of the life in white.</span><br/>
<br/>
All cloth'd with virtues manifold<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Are these—their souls are like white snow;</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Fair love, around thy heart I know</span><br/>
My heart is bound with chains of gold.<br/>
Sweet youths whose life is in the spring,<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">The water is all wine they drink,</span><br/>
They sorrow not at anything—<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">The pleasures of the life in pink.</span><br/>
<br/>
Your gold hair's like an aureole,<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Your lips are gold wine bought and sold,</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Pure golden kisses bought for gold;</span><br/>
Each breast is like a golden bowl.<br/>
<br/>
These things are for a scorn to those<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">That read great books both night and day,</span><br/>
That say, Joy dieth as the rose—<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">The pleasures of the life in gray.</span><br/>
<br/>
Sweet youths, white ladies, scholars sour,<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Rejoice, and hasten on your way;</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Mary, whose skin is white as whey,</span><br/>
Your soul is like a purple flower.<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<span style="font-size: 0.8em;"><a id="LOUANGES_DELLE"/>LOUANGES D'ELLE</span><br/>
<br/>
<br/>
—O Muse of mine that sittest orientally<br/>
With a green emerald snake about the waist of thee,<br/>
With henna-tinted feet, and almond eyes that dream,<br/>
Put down the opium-pipe of jade and ivory,<br/>
For she that is most fair is fain to hear thy song:<br/>
Awake, O Muse, and sing her praises solemnly,<br/>
That to the laughing heart of California<br/>
Hath added all the grace of France and Italy;<br/>
She who, to put to sleep my pitiless ennuis<br/>
Is come from distant Paris and from Varsovie;<br/>
Athens is in her heart, and Paris in her eyes,<br/>
Dear European angel from beyond the sea!<br/>
<br/>
—There is no use to sing; she is not to be sung;<br/>
What mortal praise can come unto her glory near?<br/>
And she hath quite forgot her natal English tongue;<br/>
She is too far, too high, thy languid praise to hear,<br/>
Too delicate, too strange, too wicked, too divine,<br/>
Too heavenly, too sweet, too bad, too fair, too dear!<br/>
<i>'N'est-elle pas l'oasis où tu rêves et la gourde</i><br/>
<i>Où tu humes à longs traits le vin du souvenir?'</i><br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<span style="font-size: 0.8em;"><a id="HELAS"/>HÉLAS</span><br/>
<br/>
<br/>
—Why sittest thou, O Muse, in grief enfolden?<br/>
—Thou hast me promis'd jewels rich and rare<br/>
To wear within my hair;<br/>
And for my slaves the kings of kingdoms olden;<br/>
<br/>
And to abide in lofty castles golden,<br/>
Because I am most fair.<br/>
And lo, I have no sandals for my feet,<br/>
And little bread to eat.<br/>
<br/>
Of that far golden Irem I am dreaming,<br/>
Whence for few kisses I did follow thee;<br/>
Fair is that spot to see,<br/>
<br/>
With far-off waving palms and towers gleaming;<br/>
Great deserts round that isle of blissful seeming<br/>
Lie stretching endlessly.<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<span style="font-size: 0.8em;"><a id="SONNET"/>SONNET</span><br/>
<br/>
<br/>
When I contemplate how my state is low,<br/>
And how my pride that had the earth for throne<br/>
In this dark city sitteth all alone,<br/>
My heart is fain for death to end its woe;<br/>
<br/>
Then when I think how all the great below<br/>
Had only sorrow and grief through all their days,<br/>
I, that with these shall some time stand in place,<br/>
My fortune like their bitter fortune know.<br/>
<br/>
Among whom also holy Baudelaire,<br/>
Though unto him the loftiest lot was given<br/>
To hear the blessed muses sing in heaven,<br/>
<br/>
Past his few days in anguish and despair;<br/>
Yet did he not bow down his mournful head<br/>
Until Peace found him in his glory dead.<br/>
<br/>
So thou in this low lair,<br/>
Although in sorrow and grief thou dost remain,<br/>
Though of all things whereof thy soul was fain<br/>
Remaineth only pain,<br/>
Yet be not thou, O soul, disconsolate:<br/>
Forget not thou thy far-exalted state.<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<span style="font-size: 0.8em;"><a id="SONNET_2"/>SONNET</span><br/>
<br/>
<br/>
Be not cast down my heart, and be not sad,<br/>
That thou like common men must sorrow know;<br/>
Not only they that live and die below,<br/>
But ev'n the gods thy supreme sorrow had;<br/>
<br/>
Not unto Tammuz was this fortune given,<br/>
Not to know grief; whom starry Ashtoreth<br/>
Sought through the seven-gated realm of death,<br/>
Far from the great moon and the stars of heaven.<br/>
<br/>
Osiris also could not but to die;<br/>
He reigneth king among the perisht dead;<br/>
And Christ, when his long grief was finished,<br/>
<br/>
Hid his great glory in the lowly ground.<br/>
All these had sorrow, that were great and high;<br/>
These also were august, these also crown'd.<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<span style="font-size: 0.8em;"><a id="RONDEAU"/>RONDEAU</span><br/>
<br/>
<br/>
As shadows pass, in the misty night,<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Over the wan and moonlit grass,</span><br/>
So passeth our glory out of sight,<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">As shadows pass.</span><br/>
<br/>
A little darkness, a little light,<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Sorrow and gladness, a weary mass,</span><br/>
Glimmer and falter and pass in blight.<br/>
<br/>
So all our life, in waning flight,<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Fadeth and faltereth, alas;</span><br/>
Passeth our sorrow and our delight,<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">As shadows pass.</span><br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<span style="font-size: 0.8em;"><a id="AUTUMN_SONG"/>AUTUMN SONG</span><br/>
<br/>
<br/>
Weep, far autumnal skies,<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Shrouded in misty air;</span><br/>
Weep, for thy solemn dearth,<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">And for thy chill despair,</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">Earth.</span><br/>
<br/>
O stricken forest-trees,<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Dead leaves that falter down</span><br/>
Solemnly to your sleep,<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Golden, and red, and brown,</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 3em;">Weep.</span><br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<span style="font-size: 0.8em;"><a id="BALLAD"/>BALLAD</span><br/>
<br/>
<br/>
The lady rode 'neath the strange sky's pall<br/>
Through the leafy woods funereal,<br/>
And all the length of her moonlit way<br/>
Was wanly white as the light of day;<br/>
Solemnly rob'd she rode along,<br/>
Unmindful of their droning throng<br/>
That throng'd her shadowy path, alas,<br/>
As though to see her funeral pass;<br/>
So through the mournful forest slow<br/>
Her palfrey's silken feet did go,<br/>
Bearing her solemnly like a god<br/>
Over the shadow-haunted sod;<br/>
She laught to see the dead desire<br/>
That even now her life should tire,<br/>
She laught to think that to the earth<br/>
They call'd her that was full of mirth,<br/>
And though before her horse's head<br/>
Throng'd the wan legions of the dead<br/>
Wanly attempting to stop her way,<br/>
She halted not for their legions gray,<br/>
But rode through the midnight's mystic noon<br/>
Under the far gaze of the moon.<br/>
Then out from the dying woods at last<br/>
Into the moonlit plain she passt;<br/>
The misty stars were almost dead<br/>
Sunk in the heavens overhead,<br/>
While low down in the solemn skies<br/>
The white moon wan'd as one that dies.<br/>
Solemnly through the misty air<br/>
She rode with gold gems in her hair;<br/>
Bright were her holy eyes divine,<br/>
And red her lips as the red red wine.<br/>
At last in the unceasing night<br/>
Down from her palfrey she doth alight<br/>
By the strange murmuring of the sea;<br/>
She climbs the tall stair fearlessly,<br/>
And cometh at last to her chamber high<br/>
Beneath the wide face of the sky.<br/>
At last her journey being done,<br/>
She hath her golden stays undone,<br/>
And being a little wearied,<br/>
Hath laid her naked on her bed,<br/>
Thinking to slumber like the dead.<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<span style="font-size: 0.8em;"><a id="CHANGELESSNESS"/>CHANGELESSNESS</span><br/>
<br/>
<br/>
When Death shall touch thy body beautiful,<br/>
And thou that art of all the earth most fair<br/>
Shalt close thine eyes upon the shining air,<br/>
An unadorned gold urn to make full;<br/>
<br/>
When that thou liest quietly inurn'd<br/>
In the dark bosom of the earth divine,<br/>
Being turned unto a heap of ashes fine,<br/>
For love of whose white face all men have burn'd;<br/>
<br/>
Then in the earth, O beautiful white love,<br/>
Thy beauty shall not wholly end and cease,<br/>
When that thou art gone to endless peace;<br/>
<br/>
Though all things beneath the sky above<br/>
Fade away, it knoweth not to die,<br/>
But abideth changeless endlessly.<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<span style="font-size: 0.8em;"><a id="MADONNA"/>MADONNA</span><br/>
<br/>
<br/>
Anguish and Mourning are as gold to her;<br/>
She weareth Pain upon her as a gem,<br/>
And on her head Grief like a diadem;<br/>
And as with frankincense and tropic myrrh<br/>
<br/>
Her face is fragrant made with utter Woe;<br/>
And on her purple gorgeous garment's hem<br/>
Madness and Death and all the ways of them<br/>
Emblazoned in strange carousal show.<br/>
<br/>
Within her delicate face are all things met,<br/>
And all the sad years and the dolorous days<br/>
Are but as jewels round her forehead set,<br/>
<br/>
Add but a little glory to her face,<br/>
A little languor to her half-clos'd eyes,<br/>
That smile so strangely under the far skies.<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<span style="font-size: 0.8em;"><a id="POPPY_SONG"/>POPPY SONG</span><br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">O poppy-buds, that in the golden air</span><br/>
Wave heavy hanging censers of delight,<br/>
Give me an anodyne for my despair;<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">O crimson poppy-blooms, O golden blight,</span><br/>
O careless drunken heavy poppy-flowers,<br/>
Make that the day for me be as the night.<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Give me to lie down in your drowsy bowers,</span><br/>
That having breathed of your rich perfume,<br/>
My soul may have all-rest through all the hours;<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">So shall I lie within my little room,</span><br/>
While the poor tyrants of the world go by,<br/>
Restfully shrouded in your velvet gloom,<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Beneath the wide face of the cloudless sky.</span><br/>
<br/>
—Even so, when thou shalt eat of us,<br/>
Even so, thy life shall be a sleep,<br/>
Empty of all things fierce and piteous;<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Even as a sailor on the tossing deep</span><br/>
Hears vaguely the vain tumult on the shore,<br/>
Shouts of the fighters, songs of them that reap.<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Life is all vanity, a loathed sore,</span><br/>
A scatter'd dust, a vain and soiled heap.—<br/>
Thou shalt have golden rest forevermore.<br/>
<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">O poppy-flowers, golden, sleepy, sweet,</span><br/>
O yellow tawny fading blooms of gold,<br/>
Give unto me your holy fruit to eat;<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Make me forget all things above the mould;</span><br/>
Make me forget that dolorous vow that sears,<br/>
Not to be lesser than the great of old;<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Make me forget the heavy old dead years,</span><br/>
And all that lives from out the writhing past,<br/>
Old struggles, dead ambitions, buried tears;<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">And that white face that I shall see the last.</span><br/>
<br/>
—Sweet is forgetfulness, most sweet to lie,<br/>
Sunken from sorrow, in our pleasant vale,<br/>
Where but the sun shines, and the clouds go by;<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Even as to them that through deep waters sail</span><br/>
The toiling shore fades and becomes a sky,<br/>
And evermore behind the billows fail.<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Sweet to forget the death-like things that were,</span><br/>
Green pastures where the clouds sail by on high,<br/>
Dead sundawns over pathless prairies fair,<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">And suns long sunk beneath the wall of the sky.</span><br/>
<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Under the sun my spirit lies alone,</span><br/>
Drunken with slumber and mild exstasy....<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Sleep, sweet sleep, long unto mine eyes unknown.</span><br/>
Drops on me as ripe fruit drops from a tree;<br/>
My dim eyes see the valley poppy-strown;<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">The clouds fade and the gold sun over me,</span><br/>
And the world's murmur sounds within my lair<br/>
Like the far tossing of some infinite sea;<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Within the heavy slumber-laden air</span><br/>
All fades, all fades, and grows afar afar,<br/>
Leaving my soul alone, empty of care,<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Even as happy long-dead bodies are.</span><br/>
Even so I slumber in my tireless close,<br/>
While the whole world fades like a fading star,<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Dies like the perfume of a dying rose.</span><br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<span style="font-size: 0.8em;"><a id="CONSOLATION"/>CONSOLATION</span><br/>
<br/>
<br/>
Among all sorrows that my heart hath known,<br/>
Among all sorrows that my spirit keep<br/>
Forever buried 'neath their mountains steep,<br/>
Standeth one consolation, one alone.<br/>
<br/>
I know that earth shall be for death a throne,<br/>
And evermore within their burials deep<br/>
The banded nations of the earth shall sleep,<br/>
Sunken in sepulchres of sculptur'd stone.<br/>
<br/>
Then all the world shall be a quietness:<br/>
Dead women beautiful with their delights;<br/>
All they that had such striving and distress,<br/>
<br/>
And endless weariness in all the lands,<br/>
White faces, eager heart-strings, soiled hands;<br/>
And peace shall hold the valleys and the heights.<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<span style="font-size: 0.8em;"><a id="LIEBES-TOD"/>LIEBES-TOD</span><br/>
<br/>
<br/>
I<br/>
<br/>
Thy splendour-lighted face before mine eyes<br/>
Shines like a flaming sunset evermore;<br/>
Thee only I behold on the earth's floor,<br/>
Thee only I behold within the skies;<br/>
<br/>
Thy coming on is like a conqueror,<br/>
Before thy footsteps the world's glory dies,<br/>
Within mine ears thy voice doth ever rise<br/>
Like a loud ocean beating on the shore.<br/>
<br/>
Thou art made kindred with eternity,<br/>
Daughter of glory, daughter of consolations;<br/>
Thy face is set above the constellations;<br/>
<br/>
Of Death! O love! be I made one with thee,<br/>
That on thy holy lips and in thy love<br/>
The world may perish and the light thereof!<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
II<br/>
<br/>
Lo, now my life is gone unto eclipse<br/>
Upon thy perilous bosom; lo, I die,<br/>
Faint with the utter whole of exstasy,<br/>
With unassuaged lips against thy lips,<br/>
<br/>
That can give no more joy; lo, at the place<br/>
Of utter joy, lo, at joy's far-off throne,<br/>
Which none shall reach, with eyes now weary grown,<br/>
I lie slain at its utmost golden base.<br/>
<br/>
Yea, we have call'd the white stars to behold<br/>
Our pale and fainting faces sick with joy;<br/>
Oregal lips that shall death's sting destroy,<br/>
<br/>
I have suck'd bare life's cup upon thy breath!<br/>
Kiss me to death! Lo, now our lips are cold,<br/>
Wilt thou not bring new joy, O Death, O Death?<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<span style="font-size: 0.8em;"><a id="EVENING_SONG"/>EVENING SONG</span><br/>
<br/>
<br/>
Lo, all the passionate pale evening<br/>
I lay between the breasts of my beloved,<br/>
Among the lilies, in the lily garden.<br/>
The sky was pale, and all the sunset faded,<br/>
And all the stars I saw not in the heaven,<br/>
Because the glory of her face above me<br/>
I saw alone, wrapt in a dream of slumber;<br/>
And lo, she was more fair than all the lilies,<br/>
Among the lilies, in the lily garden.<br/>
And all her hair was golden chains to bind me,<br/>
And all her mouth was crimson fire to burn me,<br/>
And all the world became as wind before me,<br/>
But as the wind before her face that passes,<br/>
Among the lilies, in the lily garden.<br/>
And lo, her face was fairer than the stars are,<br/>
And lo, her breasts were whiter than the moon is,<br/>
Whiter than the moon, and tipp'd with crimson coral.<br/>
And low she bow'd her body, low before me,<br/>
And gave me of her joy unto fulfilling:<br/>
She bow'd her head whereto the stars do homage,<br/>
Before whose face the years wax dim and fading,<br/>
Before whose eyes the ages pass and vanish;<br/>
Bow'd her low down before me like a lily,<br/>
Among the lilies, in the lily garden.<br/>
And now at last I care not if the morning<br/>
Come at all, or the pale stars have setting,<br/>
Nay I care not if the whole world perish,<br/>
Perish and die, or if the white stars falter,<br/>
Nay I care not if the night forever<br/>
Hold me by her, and all things have ceasing;<br/>
Yea, because her lips are more than roses,<br/>
Yea, because her breasts are more than Heaven,<br/>
Yea, because her face is more than God is,<br/>
Among the lilies, in the lily garden.<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<span style="font-size: 0.8em;"><a id="SONG_OF_THE_STARS_IN_PRAISE_OF_HER"/>SONG OF THE STARS IN PRAISE OF HER</span><br/>
<br/>
<br/>
O starry light of the dim universe!<br/>
The night adoreth thee, the planets high<br/>
That reign far off within the desert sky<br/>
Praise thee as with the sound of dulcimers,<br/>
And all the temples of the night rehearse<br/>
Thy solemn glory everlastingly!<br/>
<br/>
O thou for whom the moon's pale-lighted star<br/>
And all the planets and the milky gleam,<br/>
But as a little of thy praising seem,<br/>
And the great lights that swim through heaven afar<br/>
But the reflection of thy glory are;<br/>
Thou only art; these are but shine and dream;<br/>
<br/>
Thou art that light that doth the stars illume,<br/>
Thou art the glimmer of the moon divine;<br/>
All these are but the garment that is thine;<br/>
Thou art the wonder and the glow, the bloom,<br/>
Thou art the lonely lamp in night's great gloom,<br/>
Thou art the skyey light, the starry shine.<br/>
<br/>
Starlight is but the glory of thy face,<br/>
The shimmer of the silver planets pale<br/>
Is but the dim effulgence of thy veil;<br/>
And the great passing of the nights and days<br/>
Is all but as the perfume of thy praise.<br/>
O Holy, Holy, Holy, hail, O hail!<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<span style="font-size: 0.8em;"><a id="AUBADE"/>AUBADE</span><br/>
<br/>
<br/>
The lady awoke before the cold gray dawn,<br/>
And had no joy thereof;<br/>
—What joy is mine of all the joy of love,<br/>
When love is gone?<br/>
<br/>
Lo, all the air is strange unto mine eyes,<br/>
Lo, all the stars are dead;<br/>
Only the moon appeareth overhead<br/>
As one that dies.<br/>
<br/>
Lo, all the garden lieth desolate,<br/>
And very strange to see,<br/>
Wherein, the roses and the grass for me<br/>
Blossom'd of late.<br/>
<br/>
O rose-garden wherein my roses grew,<br/>
O odorous dim ways,<br/>
Why are ye strange to me as perish'd days,<br/>
And cold with dew?<br/>
<br/>
Through the wide window creeps the cold sweet air,<br/>
Faint with sweet rose-perfume,<br/>
It stealeth o'er my body in the gloom,<br/>
And o'er my hair.<br/>
<br/>
Surely I have drunk full of love's delight,<br/>
But now my lips are cold,<br/>
While the pale day in silence doth behold<br/>
The dying night.<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<span style="font-size: 0.8em;"><a id="REMEMBER"/>REMEMBER</span><br/>
<br/>
<br/>
Remember, ye whom the skies delight,<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Whose faces flame with the falling sun,</span><br/>
That after sunset cometh the night,<br/>
That sorrow followeth all delight,<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">When love, and lover, and lov'd are one.</span><br/>
<br/>
O ye whose days are as sands that run,<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">One house there is unknown of delight,</span><br/>
One garden is there belov'd of none,<br/>
One place there is unseen of the sun,<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Remember, ye whom the skies delight.</span><br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<span style="font-size: 0.8em;"><a id="SONG"/>SONG</span><br/>
<br/>
<br/>
She hath liv'd the life of a rose,<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">She that was fair,</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Blown on by the summer air,</span><br/>
Grown tall in a golden close.<br/>
<br/>
An ending is set to delight;<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Now thou art as grass,</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">As the leaves, as the blossoms that pass,</span><br/>
Made pale at the touch of the night.<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<span style="font-size: 0.8em;"><a id="SONG_2"/>SONG</span><br/>
<br/>
<br/>
Cometh a day and a night,<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">When the lamps of life burn dim,</span><br/>
When peace is secur'd for delight,<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">And poppies for the red-rose flower;</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">When the lamps of life burn dim,</span><br/>
Cometh a day and a night,<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">A day and a night and an hour.</span><br/>
<br/>
Cometh the end of the years,<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">When the cheeks have the lilies' bloom,</span><br/>
When slumber is given for tears,<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">And the breasts to the worm belong;</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">When the cheeks have the lilies' bloom,</span><br/>
Cometh the end of the years,<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">As silence after the song.</span><br/>
<br/>
Cometh a day and a night<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">For him to whom all is thrown,</span><br/>
Whose own is the bosom white,<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Whose own are the lips of gold;</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">For him to whom all is thrown,</span><br/>
Cometh a day and a night,<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">To have and to own and to hold.</span><br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<span style="font-size: 0.8em;"><a id="CONSTANCY"/>CONSTANCY</span><br/>
<br/>
<br/>
Surely thy face, love, is a little pale,<br/>
And somewhat wan thy lips that were so red,<br/>
And though my kisses might raise up the dead,<br/>
To waken thy deep sleep they naught avail.<br/>
<br/>
Before thy stillness some poor men might quail,<br/>
But I shall not desert thy holy bed,<br/>
Although thy passionate lips have no word said,<br/>
And thine adored breasts are cold like hail.<br/>
<br/>
Thou art gone down to Death, thou art gone down,<br/>
And the dead things shall nestle in thy hair,<br/>
And the dust shall profane thy golden crown,<br/>
<br/>
And the worms shall consume thy perfect face;<br/>
Even so: but Death shall bring thee no disgrace,<br/>
And to the stars I cry, Thou art most fair!<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<span style="font-size: 0.8em;"><a id="REQUIEM"/>REQUIEM</span><br/>
<br/>
<br/>
White-rose perfume<br/>
Go with thee on thy way<br/>
Unto thy shaded tomb;<br/>
Low music fall<br/>
Lightly as autumn leaves<br/>
About thy solemn pall;<br/>
Faint incense rise<br/>
From many a censer swung<br/>
Above thy closed eyes;<br/>
And the sounds of them that pray<br/>
Make thy low bier an holy thing to be,<br/>
That all the beauty underneath the sun<br/>
Carries unto the clay.<br/>
<br/>
Odour of musk and roses<br/>
Make sweet thy crimson lips<br/>
Whereon my soul hath gone to deep eclipse;<br/>
Poppies' and violets' scent<br/>
Be for thy burial lent<br/>
And every flower that sweetest smell discloses.<br/>
Upon thy breast,<br/>
Before which all my spirit hath bow'd down,<br/>
White lilies rest;<br/>
And for a crown upon thy mortal head<br/>
Be poppies red.<br/>
<br/>
And for eternal peace<br/>
Be poppies strown upon thy holy eyes,<br/>
Till also these shall cease<br/>
Turning to that which man is when he dies.<br/>
And poppies on thine unassuaged mouth<br/>
Be strown, until death shall be done with thee,<br/>
Until the white worms shall be one with thee.<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<span style="font-size: 0.8em;"><a id="AUTUMN_BURIAL"/>AUTUMN BURIAL</span><br/>
<br/>
<br/>
The moon shone full that night,<br/>
And fill'd with misty light<br/>
The solemn clouds hung white<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Above her pall;</span><br/>
Waiting the golden dawn<br/>
The silent woods stood wan,<br/>
While through their aisles mov'd on<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Her funeral.</span><br/>
<br/>
Palely their torches flare,<br/>
While rob'd in white they bear<br/>
Her corpse that was most fair<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Of them that die,</span><br/>
By sleeping forests tall<br/>
And woods funereal<br/>
Through the decaying fall<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Beneath the sky.</span><br/>
<br/>
The orbed moon looks down<br/>
Upon her golden crown,<br/>
From out the forest brown<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">The wood-things stare;</span><br/>
The holy stars behold<br/>
Her woven hair of gold,<br/>
And slumbering and cold<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Her bosom bare.</span><br/>
<br/>
The moon shines full o'erhead,<br/>
And they with bowed head<br/>
About her body dead<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">In silence stand;</span><br/>
There where no foot hath trod<br/>
They bury her with sod<br/>
Alone with only God<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">In all the land.</span><br/>
<br/>
Tall forests stand around<br/>
About her grassy mound<br/>
And over all the ground<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Lie shadows hoar.</span><br/>
She 'neath the passing moon<br/>
Sees not the shadows strewn<br/>
Sunk in her golden swoon<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Forevermore.</span><br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<span style="font-size: 0.8em;"><a id="SONNET_OF_BURIAL"/>SONNET OF BURIAL</span><br/>
<br/>
<br/>
Now that the earth thy buried corpse doth hold,<br/>
Now that thy soul that hath so much desired,<br/>
Is gone down to the places of the tired,<br/>
Far from the dawning and the star-light cold;<br/>
<br/>
Thine eyes shall not again the sun behold;<br/>
Now shall thy body that all men hath fired<br/>
Have ceasing, and thy grave shall be admired,<br/>
That doth the fairest thing o' the earth enfold.<br/>
<br/>
Now that thine ashes are all buried,<br/>
And thou art gone to slumber with the blessed,<br/>
Thy buried body shall be no more distressed;<br/>
<br/>
Being now number'd with the placid dead,<br/>
Thine eyes forever more have ceas'd from weeping,<br/>
For evermore thy spirit shall have sleeping.<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<span style="font-size: 0.8em;"><a id="NOCTURNE"/>NOCTURNE</span><br/>
<br/>
<br/>
Lo, how the moon, beloved,<br/>
Far in the heavens gleaming,<br/>
Over the ocean dreaming<br/>
Her pallid light doth throw;<br/>
<br/>
Lo, where the endless ocean,<br/>
Where softly the night wind bloweth,<br/>
Into the darkness floweth,<br/>
Thither at last I go.<br/>
<br/>
Listen, how sweet the ocean<br/>
Unto our spirits sigheth,<br/>
And lo, where our pinnace lieth<br/>
Awaiting, with sails unfurl'd;<br/>
<br/>
Come thou with me, beloved,<br/>
Come thou with heart unquailing,<br/>
There where no ships come sailing,<br/>
Out of the dreary world.<br/>
<br/>
Come thou with me, beloved,<br/>
Out of the world and its seeming,<br/>
Where all things are only dreaming,<br/>
And shadows all we know;<br/>
<br/>
The heart hath not found its longing<br/>
Here, nor shall find it ever;<br/>
Behold of my life's endeavour<br/>
Remaineth only woe.<br/>
<br/>
Behold, my desire, my anguish,<br/>
Trouble and toil surpassing,<br/>
Are all but as shadows passing,<br/>
Shadows the fame thereof;<br/>
<br/>
Here, where the heart attaineth<br/>
Not, what the heart desireth,<br/>
Where beauty too early tireth,<br/>
And kisses mean not love.<br/>
<br/>
Here where what man hath desired,<br/>
He shall not find forever,<br/>
But ever and only ever<br/>
Unending vanity;<br/>
<br/>
Not in this world, beloved,<br/>
My only longing hideth,<br/>
But in farther lands abideth<br/>
And over a wider sea.<br/>
<br/>
There, when the spring shall blossom,<br/>
There, when the winter is vanisht,<br/>
My spirit that long was banisht<br/>
Shall come to its home, though late;<br/>
<br/>
There in mine olden kingdom,<br/>
Where nothing is transitory,<br/>
I in exceeding glory<br/>
Shall hold mine ancient state.<br/>
<br/>
Here let us leave our anguish,<br/>
Here at the hour of leaving,<br/>
Leave we our woe and grieving<br/>
Like garments long outworn;<br/>
<br/>
Leave we our mortal sorrow,<br/>
Our longing and our repenting,<br/>
The anguish and the lamenting<br/>
That made our hearts to mourn.<br/>
<br/>
Others may weep and anguish,<br/>
Others may talk of laughter,<br/>
And ever a little after<br/>
Sorrow is theirs the more;<br/>
<br/>
But we two have done with laughter<br/>
And sadness that hath no reason,<br/>
We two in the springtime season<br/>
Push out from the weary shore.<br/>
<br/>
Past are the storms of winter,<br/>
Past is the rainy weather,<br/>
Past are the snows, together<br/>
With sadness and sorrowing;<br/>
<br/>
Past are the rains, beloved,<br/>
Past is the time of weeping,<br/>
And lo, o'er the green earth sleeping,<br/>
Laugheth the world-wide Spring!<br/>
<br/>
Come thou with me, beloved,<br/>
O let us now be starting!<br/>
All things, at the hour of parting,<br/>
Shall be made new for thee;<br/>
<br/>
Listen, how sweet the ocean<br/>
Unto our spirits calleth;<br/>
Softly the starlight falleth<br/>
Over the dreaming sea.<br/>
<br/>
Fadeth the land, beloved,<br/>
That long hath our spirits tired,<br/>
Before us lies that desired<br/>
Far country, strange and new;<br/>
<br/>
Far off lies that dream'd-of country<br/>
Eternally fair and blessed<br/>
Eternally undistressed,<br/>
Far over the ocean blue.<br/>
<br/>
Knowst thou the land, beloved?<br/>
Year-long with gentle motion<br/>
There the unending ocean<br/>
Batheth the tropic shore;<br/>
<br/>
There never storms blow loudly,<br/>
There never wet rain falleth,<br/>
There never loud wind calleth,<br/>
Nor stormy waters roar.<br/>
<br/>
Fairer the stars that lighten<br/>
There, than to us is given,<br/>
There in a fairer heaven<br/>
Shineth a larger moon;<br/>
<br/>
Fair stand the castles golden<br/>
There, and o'er stranger flowers<br/>
There through the long long hours<br/>
The wandering breezes swoon.<br/>
<br/>
There in that land, beloved,<br/>
Is never a sound of living,<br/>
Never is heard thanksgiving<br/>
There, nor the noise of moan;<br/>
<br/>
There naught is heard of sorrow,<br/>
And nothing is there begotten;<br/>
There, with all life forgotten,<br/>
We two shall come alone.<br/>
<br/>
There, O my one beloved,<br/>
Through twilight never-closing,<br/>
We two shall sit reposing,<br/>
Forever, thou with me;<br/>
<br/>
There 'neath the stars eternal,<br/>
We two shall sit, we only,<br/>
While from the heavens, lonely,<br/>
The moon sinks in the sea.<br/>
</p>
<hr class="chap"/>
<h3>THE BOOK OF JADE</h3>
<h4><a id="PART_TWO"/>PART TWO</h4>
<hr class="tb"/>
<p style="margin-left: 20%;">
<span style="font-size: 0.8em;"><a id="MAD_SONNET"/>MAD SONNET</span><br/>
<br/>
<br/>
Lo, in the night I cry out, in the night,<br/>
God! and my voice shall howl into the sky!<br/>
I am weary of seeing shapeless things that fly,<br/>
And flap into my face in their vile flight;<br/>
<br/>
I am weary of dead things that crowd into my sight,<br/>
I am weary of hearing horrible corpses that cry,<br/>
God! I am weary of that lidless Eye<br/>
That comes and stares at me, O God of light!<br/>
<br/>
All, all the world is become a dead blur,<br/>
God! God! and I, stricken with hideous blight,<br/>
Crouch in the black corners, and I dare not stir.<br/>
<br/>
I am aweary of my evil plight.<br/>
If thou art not a dead corpse in thy sky,<br/>
Send thou down Death into my loathed sty!<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<span style="font-size: 0.8em;"><a id="THE_HOUSE_OF_YOUTH"/>THE HOUSE OF YOUTH</span><br/>
<br/>
<br/>
Far in the melancholy hills it stands,<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Far off; and through the vista of the years,</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Down which my soul its helpless journey steers,</span><br/>
It flames a fire to lighten all the lands,<br/>
A fire that burns me and a flame that brands<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 0.5em;">Me, whose dead days pass slow as heavy tears.</span><br/>
<br/>
The road my footsteps tread is dim and still,<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">There darkness abides and silence endlessly,</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">And the low way mine eyes can scarcely see;</span><br/>
And yet the light and sound from that far hill<br/>
Like the sky's fire my weary pathway fill,<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">So that it seems a place of life to be.</span><br/>
<br/>
The world is but a background for it there,<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">There where it stands, loud like a beaten lyre,</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">And flames blood-red like some vast funeral-pyre,</span><br/>
Whereat my heart to fail doth not forbear;<br/>
Of all the things that have been made soe'er<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Only the House remains, a quenchless fire.</span><br/>
<br/>
Ah God, that this thing were not in the world—<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">The hateful House that flames with light and song</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">And weary singing all the ages long;</span><br/>
Ah that ev'n this might in the dust be hurl'd,<br/>
And crush'd and slain, even as my heart, where curl'd<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">The kindly armies of the worm do throng.</span><br/>
<br/>
Yea, surely I have seen it long ago,<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Far sunken in the weary dust of time;</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Yea surely even that stair so hard to climb</span><br/>
I climb'd, and strode its hallways to and fro;<br/>
The which were bright with many lamps aglow,<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">And loud with choristers in ceaseless chime.</span><br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<a id="DE_PROFUNDIS"/>DE PROFUNDIS<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
Out of the grave, O God, I call to thee,<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Be thou not deaf unto my dolorous cry;</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">My soul is fallen down into the sty,</span><br/>
And the dead things are crawling over me;<br/>
O thou my God, give me the worm to flee,<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Out from the pit's depths I would rise on high.</span><br/>
<br/>
Again am I fallen down into the grave,<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">My soul is sunken in the place of slime,</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">I am too weak its loathed walls to climb,</span><br/>
Thou, only thou, O God, art strong to save;<br/>
Lo, in mine eyes the worms have made their cave,<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">And squatting toads oppress me all the time.</span><br/>
<br/>
Yea, from this pit I have crawl'd out before;<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">With groans and cries and many a dolorous fall,</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">I have climbed up its impregnable wall;</span><br/>
I shall not rise now from its slimy floor;<br/>
O God, hear thou my lamentable call,<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Or from the grave I come not evermore.</span><br/>
<br/>
I am become a housing for the toad;<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">All things are fled wherein I took delight;</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">There is no joy here, and there is no light;</span><br/>
O God, O God, I have reap'd what I sow'd;<br/>
I am become a dead thing in the night,<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">And in my heart the worms have their abode.</span><br/>
<br/>
Lo, from my body all my might is fled,<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">And all the light is gone out of mine eyes;</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Mine ears hear only lamentable cries,.</span><br/>
And eyeless things stand round about my head;<br/>
I am made as a man that slowly dies;<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">I am made as a man already dead.</span><br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<span style="font-size: 0.8em;"><a id="PRAYER"/>PRAYER</span><br/>
<br/>
<span style="font-size: 0.8em;">IN TIME OF PLAGUE</span><br/>
<br/>
Holy Pestilence, holy Pestilence, gird thee with might,<br/>
Holy Pestilence, come thou upon them, come thou at night,<br/>
Holy Pestilence, put on thy mantle, put on thy crown,<br/>
Holy Pestilence, come on the cities, come and strike down,<br/>
Holy Pestilence, let them all perish, touch'd with thy breath,<br/>
Holy Pestilence, let them grow rotten, moulding in death,<br/>
Holy Pestilence, put on thy garments, a crown on thy head,<br/>
Holy Pestilence, let all the nations fall at thy tread,<br/>
Holy Pestilence, let them all perish, let them be dead.<br/>
Holy Pestilence, then shall the cities sink with thy might,<br/>
Holy Pestilence, they shall lie desert, plague-struck at night,<br/>
Holy Pestilence, then shall the rulers, crown'd with a crown,<br/>
Holy Pestilence, feeling them stricken, reel and fall down,<br/>
Holy Pestilence, then shall the nations faint with thy breath,<br/>
Holy Pestilence, then shall the valleys be cover'd with death,<br/>
Holy Pestilence, peasant with ruler, body with head,<br/>
Holy Pestilence, all shall be stricken under thy tread,<br/>
Holy Pestilence, all shall be rotten, all shall be dead.<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<span style="font-size: 0.8em;"><a id="SESTETTES"/>SESTETTES</span><br/>
<br/>
<br/>
I<br/>
<br/>
Thou shalt rejoice for woe:<br/>
The pallid goblet old,<br/>
That holds thy life's dull wine,<br/>
Is made thereby divine;<br/>
Stain'd with a purpler glow,<br/>
And wrought in stranger gold.<br/>
<br/>
II<br/>
<br/>
From the suck'd lees of pain,<br/>
We have won joy again:<br/>
Death shall thee not distress:<br/>
That sleepy bitterness<br/>
To thy kist lips shall be<br/>
The supreme exstasy.<br/>
<br/>
III<br/>
<br/>
Put ashes on your golden body bare,<br/>
Puissant as musk, bitter-sweet as to die,<br/>
Ashes upon your arms that grow not old,<br/>
And on your unassuaged lips of gold:<br/>
So we will wanton in love's sepulchre,<br/>
And mock the face of Death with blasphemy.<br/>
<br/>
IV<br/>
<br/>
I love you more than Death: your mournful head,<br/>
Your shrouding hair, and your unfathom'd eyes,<br/>
And your white body beautiful, alas,<br/>
Priestess and victim in love's holy mass....<br/>
Your flesh that loves, and loving ever dies....<br/>
I could not love you more if you were dead.<br/>
<br/>
V<br/>
<br/>
Death is death; the little host that squirms,<br/>
The smell, the dark, the coffin clos'd, and I<br/>
So soft, so soft; no movement, and no breath;<br/>
No ears, no nose, no eyeballs; Death is Death;<br/>
The sepulchre, no sight, no sound, no cry,<br/>
And always; Death is Death; the worms! the worms<br/>
<br/>
VI<br/>
<br/>
Not for your evil is my spirit sad—<br/>
I mourn because you are not really bad;<br/>
Because your beauty's perfect cruelty<br/>
Is ever marr'd with pity and distress,<br/>
And you still show within your wickedness<br/>
The poor stale weakness of humanity.<br/>
<br/>
VII<br/>
<br/>
I am as one that thirsteth for all things,<br/>
As one that holdeth to his lips the cup,<br/>
With lower'd eyes searching the wine's dull flame.<br/>
No thing may I refuse among all things,<br/>
Till, having drain'd unto its dregs the cup,<br/>
I may return into the astral flame.<br/>
<br/>
VIII<br/>
<br/>
Heart, we have wholly drain'd the cup of sadness,<br/>
And found in sadness no reality;<br/>
Now from the night of sadness let us go.<br/>
Henceforward let us drain the cup of gladness,<br/>
And find in gladness no reality;<br/>
From sadness then and gladness let us go.<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<span style="font-size: 0.8em;"><a id="SONNET_OF_THE_INSTRUMENTS_OF_DEATH"/>SONNET OF THE INSTRUMENTS OF DEATH</span><br/>
<br/>
<br/>
Adorned daggers, ruby-hilted swords;<br/>
Huge mortal serpents in gold volumes roll'd;<br/>
All-holy poisons in wrought cups of gold;<br/>
Unfailing crucifixes of strong cords;<br/>
<br/>
Mortal baptismal waters without fords,<br/>
Wherein lie death's communicants untold—<br/>
Which of these instruments blessed and old,<br/>
Is meetest for life's purple-robed lords?<br/>
<br/>
Ye that commune in death's ciborium,<br/>
Of all the vessels in his sacristy<br/>
Which will ye choose to make of you a clod—<br/>
<br/>
Sharp swords, bright lightnings, orient opium?—<br/>
All these, brave souls, are of one sanctity;<br/>
All ways are good whereby ye pass to God.<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<span style="font-size: 0.8em;"><a id="TRUTH"/>TRUTH</span><br/>
<br/>
<br/>
It is not that I have not sought thy face<br/>
Ceaselessly through the world's eternal lie,.<br/>
More than all things and throughout every place,<br/>
Which having seen I were content to die.<br/>
<br/>
But I have sought thee and I have not found;<br/>
Wherefore my soul is banish'd from delight,<br/>
And sitteth joyless as a madman bound<br/>
Seeing vain visions in the loathed night.<br/>
<br/>
I know not even that I do not know,<br/>
But all things waver before me to and fro;<br/>
As one half head that would be dead I lie.<br/>
<br/>
And thou, Death, if thy face be really fair,<br/>
I know not, or but renewal of vanity;<br/>
Wherefore mine eyes have seen the last despair.<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<span style="font-size: 0.8em;"><a id="HEGEL"/>HEGEL</span><br/>
<br/>
<br/>
Because my hope is dead, my heart a stone,<br/>
I read the words that Hegel once did write—<br/>
An idiot gibbering in the dark alone—<br/>
Till on my heart and vision fell the night.<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<span style="font-size: 0.8em;"><a id="MONOTONY"/>MONOTONY</span><br/>
<br/>
<br/>
A dead corpse full of wormy questionings,<br/>
Beneath the open sky my soul lies dead,<br/>
Shameless and rotten and unburied,<br/>
For whom eternity no difference brings.<br/>
<br/>
Only the wind my loathed incense flings<br/>
Afar afar; only above my head<br/>
Day passes, night returns when day is fled,<br/>
Unchangeable return of changeless things.<br/>
<br/>
Unto the dead all things bring only pain,<br/>
And evermore my perish'd heart is woe<br/>
For the vile worms that gnaw it lying low;<br/>
<br/>
While the dead days, like to an endless chain,<br/>
Pass ever o'er my body cruelly slow,<br/>
And evermore with pain return again.<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<span style="font-size: 0.8em;"><a id="SEPULTURE"/>SEPULTURE</span><br/>
<br/>
<br/>
My heart is but a tomb, where vain and cold<br/>
My dead hopes lie: encoffin'd there my Pride<br/>
Lies dead, and my Life's Gladness crucified,<br/>
And there my Morning Joy long turn'd to mould;<br/>
<br/>
And there like once-lov'd corpses dead and old<br/>
My Victory that long long since hath died,<br/>
And all my Hopes lie shrouded side by side,<br/>
For whom no eyes have wept, no dirges toll'd.<br/>
<br/>
And there insensate on the darken'd floor<br/>
Despair a maniac still doth howl and scream,<br/>
Among all these long dead alive alone;<br/>
<br/>
Among these things I sit upon a throne,<br/>
In endless contemplation evermore;<br/>
Nor these suffice to break my iron dream.<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<span style="font-size: 0.8em;"><a id="MISERRIMUS"/>MISERRIMUS</span><br/>
<br/>
<br/>
In the last hopeless depth of hell's dark tomb<br/>
Wherein I sit for aye with bowed head<br/>
In anguish and great sorrow buried<br/>
Where never sun the blackness doth illume,<br/>
<br/>
I saw pass by me through the bitter gloom<br/>
All them whom life with deepest grief hath fed,<br/>
Whom also here among the hopeless dead<br/>
Through hell pursueth maniac, gnashing doom.<br/>
<br/>
Me there forever crusht to hopeless stone<br/>
They passt by, all the damn'd; they shall not know<br/>
Through all eternity but only woe,<br/>
Now hear no sound but sound of them that groan.<br/>
<br/>
And unto me that sat than these more low,<br/>
These seem'd like happy gods that heaven own;<br/>
They past away; and there in hell alone<br/>
My heart took up again its ancient woe.<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<span style="font-size: 0.8em;"><a id="SCORN"/>SCORN</span><br/>
<br/>
<br/>
Dead am I, and ye triumph o'er me dead,<br/>
Ye that within mine eyes have found your home,<br/>
Ye that are soft and blind and white like foam,<br/>
Ye that have made of me your meat and bread.<br/>
<br/>
Unto the worms I am abandoned;<br/>
Over my flesh their loathed cohorts roam;<br/>
Upon my heart whereto their hosts have clomb<br/>
Their hungry lips shall evermore be fed.<br/>
<br/>
Here am I but a dead corpse in a tomb;<br/>
I shall not out from my accurs'd abode,<br/>
Inhabited by the dull worm and the toad;<br/>
<br/>
Ye vile sojourners in my rotten room,<br/>
Torment me with your everlasting goad!<br/>
I scorn you till the end shall come of doom.<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<span style="font-size: 0.8em;"><a id="THE_GRAVE"/>THE GRAVE</span><br/>
<br/>
<br/>
The loathed worms are crawling over me<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">All the dead hours; about my buried head</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Their soft intolerable mouths are gathered,</span><br/>
And in my dead eyes that have ceas'd to see.<br/>
I am full of worms and rotten utterly,<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Dead, dead, dead, dead, dead, dead, dead, dead, dead, dead.</span><br/>
<br/>
The lifeless earth lies close against mine eyes;<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">I know that I have rotted long ago;</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">My limbs are made one with the worms I know</span><br/>
Where all my head and body putrifies.<br/>
So in the earth my coffin'd ordure lies<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Within my loathed shambles strait and low.</span><br/>
<br/>
There is no thing now where my face hath been,<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">And all my flesh lies soft upon the floor;</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Unto my heart the worms have found a door,</span><br/>
And all my body is to the worms akin;<br/>
They long time since their feasting did begin,<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">And they shall part not from me evermore.</span><br/>
<br/>
Here lie I stretch'd out through the rotting years,<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">And I am surely weary of the grave,</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">And I have sometimes thought that I might rave,</span><br/>
And my two perish'd eyes almost shed tears.<br/>
There is no one that sees and none that hears;<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">I shall not out from my corrupted cave.</span><br/>
<br/>
Here now forever with the lustful worms<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">I lie within my putrid sunken sty,</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">And through eternity my soul shall die.</span><br/>
O thou toward whom all my dead spirit squirms!<br/>
Forevermore I love thee through all terms<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Until the dead stars rot in the black sky.</span><br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<span style="font-size: 0.8em;"><a id="MUMMY"/>MUMMY</span><br/>
<br/>
<br/>
Thou art at last made perfect; from the estate<br/>
Of mushy life Death hath thee petrified.<br/>
The soft the flowing and the putrified<br/>
That made thee up, is by that artist great<br/>
<br/>
Now crystalliz'd unto a changeless state.<br/>
That thing thou walkedst, nos'd and ear'd and eyed,<br/>
Eternally severely doth abide,<br/>
Sunk from the bands of them that drank and ate.<br/>
<br/>
Green mummies walk above thy walled gloom,<br/>
Unripen'd mummies; they intemperate<br/>
Seek in life's beauty their high-crowned doom<br/>
<br/>
In vain. But thee no passion doth illume<br/>
Stiff in the musked darkness of the tomb<br/>
Hard in stiff bands of red and nacarat.<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<span style="font-size: 0.8em;"><a id="SEPULCHRAL_LIFE"/>SEPULCHRAL LIFE</span><br/>
<br/>
<br/>
Lo, all the world as some vast corpse long dead,<br/>
Fadeth and perisheth and doth decay,<br/>
Even as a corpse, in whose unhonor'd clay<br/>
The worms have long the inmost secrets read;<br/>
<br/>
Even as a corpse, upon whose lowly head<br/>
The sun beats, and the holy rain doth play;<br/>
Even as a corpse, whereof the people say,<br/>
—We would that these dead bones were buried.<br/>
<br/>
Even so: and in the earth's vast sepulchre<br/>
Our fainting souls their doubtful footsteps bear,<br/>
Dreaming of that which no dead men may see;<br/>
<br/>
And in our passage to the second death,<br/>
We whisper strange names with our pesty breath,<br/>
Of Love, and Honour, and great Victory.<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<span style="font-size: 0.8em;"><a id="CORPSE"/>CORPSE</span><br/>
<br/>
<br/>
A dead corpse crowned with a crown of gold<br/>
Sits thron'd beneath the sky's gigantic pall;<br/>
Gold garments from its rotted shoulders fall,<br/>
And regal purple robes funereal.<br/>
<br/>
Before its face a vast processional<br/>
Goes by with offerings for its great knees cold;<br/>
Its soft hand doth a golden sceptre hold;<br/>
And in its flesh lie sleeping worms uproll'd.<br/>
<br/>
They that pass ceaseless by see not at all;<br/>
They know not that beneath its garments' fold<br/>
Is but a corpse, rotted, and dead, and tall.<br/>
<br/>
He is accurst that sees it dead and old;<br/>
He is accurst that sees: the white worms call<br/>
For him: for him have funeral dirges toll'd.<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<span style="font-size: 0.8em;"><a id="MANKIND"/>MANKIND</span><br/>
<br/>
<br/>
They do not know that they are wholly dead,<br/>
Nor that their bodies are to the worm given o'er<br/>
They pass beneath the sky forevermore;<br/>
With their dead flesh the earth is cumbered.<br/>
<br/>
Each day they drink of wine and eat of bread,<br/>
And do the things that they have done before;<br/>
And yet their hearts are rotten to the core,<br/>
And from their eyes the light of life is fled.<br/>
<br/>
Surely the sun is weary of their breath;<br/>
They have no ears, and they are dumb and blind;<br/>
Long time their bodies hunger for the grave.<br/>
<br/>
How long, O God, shall these dead corpses rave?<br/>
When shall the earth be clean of humankind?<br/>
When shall the sky cease to behold this death?<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<span style="font-size: 0.8em;"><a id="THE_DEFILERS"/>THE DEFILERS</span><br/>
<br/>
<br/>
O endless idiocy of humankind!<br/>
O blatant dead that howl and scream and roar!<br/>
O strange dead things the worms have gambled for!<br/>
O dull and senseless, foolish, mad and blind!<br/>
<br/>
How long now shall your scent defile the wind?<br/>
How long shall you make vile the earth's wide floor?<br/>
How long, how long, O waiting ages hoar,<br/>
Shall the white dawn their gaping faces find?<br/>
<br/>
O vile and simple, blind of heart and mind,<br/>
When shall your last wave roll forevermore<br/>
Back from the sick and long-defiled shore?<br/>
<br/>
When shall the grave the last dead carcass bind?<br/>
O shameless humankind! O dead! O dead!<br/>
When shall your rottenness be buried?<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<span style="font-size: 0.8em;"><a id="THE_GROTESQUES"/>THE GROTESQUES</span><br/>
<br/>
<br/>
I<br/>
<br/>
I saw a dead corpse lying in a tomb,<br/>
Long buried and rotten to the core;<br/>
Behold this corpse shall know not evermore<br/>
Aught that may be outside its wormy room;<br/>
<br/>
It lies uncover'd in the pesty gloom,<br/>
Eyeless and earless, on the charnel-floor,<br/>
While in its nameless corpse the wormlets hoar<br/>
Make in its suppurated brain their room.<br/>
<br/>
And in that charnel that no lights illume,<br/>
It shriek'd of things that lay outside its door;<br/>
And while the still worms through its soft heart bore,<br/>
<br/>
It lay and reason'd of the ways of doom,<br/>
And in its head thoughts mov'd as in a womb;<br/>
And in its heart the worms lie evermore.<br/>
<br/>
II<br/>
<br/>
I saw a dead corpse in a haughty car,<br/>
Whom in a high tomb phantom horses bore,<br/>
Aye to and fro upon the scatter'd floor;<br/>
His dead eyes star'd as though they look'd afar,<br/>
<br/>
His gold wheels myriad perish'd souls did mar,<br/>
While through his flesh the ravenous wormlets tore;<br/>
He in whose eyes the worm was conqueror,<br/>
Held his high head unmoved like a star.<br/>
<br/>
And as with loud sound and reverberant jar,<br/>
And as with splash of crusht flesh and dull roar,<br/>
The death-car thunder'd past the tomb-walls hoar,<br/>
<br/>
Within those dead dominions the dead tsar<br/>
Receiv'd his plaudits where dead bodies are;<br/>
And in his heart the worms lie evermore.<br/>
<br/>
III<br/>
<br/>
I saw a dead corpse making a strange cry,<br/>
With dead feet planted on a high tomb's floor;<br/>
The dead stand round, with faces that implore;<br/>
His dead hands bless them, stretched forth on high.<br/>
<br/>
—And art thou God?—and art thou majesty?—<br/>
And art thou he whom all the dead adore?—<br/>
And art thou he that hath the skies in store?—<br/>
Nay, nay, dead dust, dead dust, and vanity.<br/>
<br/>
And wouldst thou rise up to the lighted sky?—<br/>
Nay, nay, thy limbs are rotten on the floor;<br/>
Thou shalt not out from thy polluted sty;<br/>
<br/>
Thou wouldst become divinity once more,<br/>
Thou dreamest of splendour that shall never die<br/>
And in thy heart the worms lie evermore.<br/>
<br/>
IV<br/>
<br/>
I saw a dead corpse lying on the floor<br/>
Of a tomb; worms were in its woman's head,<br/>
Its black flesh lay about it shred on shred,<br/>
And the dead things slept in its bosom hoar.<br/>
<br/>
And evermore inside that loathed door,<br/>
It turn'd itself as one upon a bed,<br/>
It turn'd itself as one whom sleep hath fled,<br/>
As one that the sweet pangs of passion bore.<br/>
<br/>
And from its passionate mouth's corrupted sore,<br/>
And from its lips that are no longer red,<br/>
Came forth love's accents; and it spake, and said.<br/>
<br/>
—The Pleiades and night's noon-hours are o'er,<br/>
And I am left alone in wearyhead.<br/>
And in its heart the worms lie evermore.<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<span style="font-size: 0.8em;"><a id="DEAD_DIALOGUE"/>DEAD DIALOGUE</span><br/>
<br/>
<br/>
1st Corpse.<br/>
<br/>
I would now that the sweet light of the sun<br/>
Might once again shine down upon my face;<br/>
So weary am I of my rottenness.<br/>
<br/>
2nd Corpse.<br/>
<br/>
Rejoice that now at least thou art done with life;<br/>
This thing shall nevermore return.<br/>
<br/>
1st Corpse.<br/>
<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 12em;">At last</span><br/>
My body is aweary of the tomb;<br/>
It is a hundred years since in the grave<br/>
I have lain down between four narrow walls,<br/>
Shut up with putrid darkness and the worm.<br/>
There is no flesh upon my body now,<br/>
That was so long a-rotting; on my shelf<br/>
Here am I now nothing but stinking bones,<br/>
That have had life beneath the face of the sun.<br/>
<br/>
3rd Corpse.<br/>
<br/>
<i>I</i> am not yet utterly putrified,<br/>
And the worms yet within my flesh abound;<br/>
I do repent me that I did not learn<br/>
What life was, while I liv'd beneath the sun—<br/>
At least then I might think of what I had done;<br/>
But I am rotten, and I have not liv'd.<br/>
<br/>
1st Corpse.<br/>
<br/>
I would that I might leave this place of ordure<br/>
And look once more upon the face of the world,<br/>
Where the sun is.<br/>
<br/>
2nd Corpse.<br/>
<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 9em;">O foolish ragged-bones,</span><br/>
Wouldst thou show forth thy dripping excrements,<br/>
And shredded rottenness to the face of day?—<br/>
Stink and be still, and leave us here in peace.<br/>
<br/>
1st Corpse.<br/>
<br/>
Envy me not, O stench, slop-face, dung-eyes;<br/>
My bones are clean and dry as the tomb's walls,<br/>
And stink not; as for thee, thou art a sink.<br/>
<br/>
2nd Corpse.<br/>
<br/>
Envy me not, thou, that I am so sweet<br/>
The black worms love me; hungry were that worm<br/>
That on thee preys.<br/>
<br/>
4th Corpse.<br/>
<br/>
Be silent, both ye dead and rotten things;<br/>
Lo I, that was unburied yesterday,<br/>
Am fair and smooth and firm, and almost sweet;<br/>
If that I were not dead, one might me love.<br/>
<br/>
3rd Corpse.<br/>
<br/>
Is it so sweet a thing, this love, this love?<br/>
<br/>
2nd Corpse.<br/>
<br/>
Thy lips are green for kissing, and streaks of black<br/>
Streak over thee where the worms have not yet been!<br/>
<br/>
4th Corpse.<br/>
<br/>
Ha, ha, I know wherefore thou speakest so:<br/>
Because thy torture is too great for thee,<br/>
And the worms' gnawing, and thy body's rottenness,<br/>
And the rottenness in thy bones and in thy brain!<br/>
<br/>
1st Corpse.<br/>
<br/>
O beautiful, O dead, O spit upon,<br/>
He speaketh well that is but lately dead;<br/>
Thy flesh lies all along thee like green slime,<br/>
O pudding gravied in thine own dead sauce!<br/>
<br/>
2nd Corpse.<br/>
<br/>
Rotten one!<br/>
<br/>
1st Corpse.<br/>
<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 6em;">Dung-heap!</span><br/>
<br/>
2nd Corpse.<br/>
<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 11.5em;">Dead one!</span><br/>
<br/>
1st Corpse.<br/>
<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 16.5em;">Beast! beast! beast!</span><br/>
<i>Therefore</i> perhaps, thou art so early dead?<br/>
<br/>
2nd Corpse.<br/>
<br/>
They say that those thou lovedst were not men,<br/>
O goat-face—Shall I say what was thy death?<br/>
<br/>
4th Corpse.<br/>
<br/>
Come, come, my brothers, be not so slanderous;<br/>
We have all been the same upon the earth.<br/>
<br/>
3rd Corpse.<br/>
<br/>
Thou sayest true, new brother.<br/>
<br/>
1st Corpse.<br/>
<br/>
Thou sayest true.<br/>
<br/>
2nd Corpse.<br/>
<br/>
I shall not suffer anything any more;<br/>
(Aside.) I have left all that; I am evermore releas'd;<br/>
I shall not struggle and suffer any more;<br/>
This seemeth strange and very sweet to me;<br/>
And I shall grow accustom'd to the worms.<br/>
<br/>
5th Corpse.<br/>
<br/>
Rejoice not thou, that thou art fallen<br/>
Into a pit where people leave their dung;<br/>
There is no reason here for any joy.<br/>
<br/>
Sepulchre.<br/>
<br/>
Be silent, now, ye spindle-shankèd dead!<br/>
Ye will learn to be silent when y'are here<br/>
For a long time; ye always spout and roar,<br/>
At first, before the time of rottenness;<br/>
But so I suppose it must be,—y'are not the first,<br/>
And ye shall not be the last; so fast i' the world,<br/>
So eagerly they are begotten, and they die,<br/>
And they are begotten again; just for this end<br/>
Hideously propagated evermore.<br/>
<br/>
A Voice above singing.<br/>
<br/>
Golden is the sunlight,<br/>
When the daylight closes,<br/>
Golden blow the roses<br/>
Ere the spring is old;<br/>
All thy hair is golden,<br/>
Falling long and lowly<br/>
Round thy bosom holy;<br/>
And thy heart is of fine gold!<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<span style="font-size: 0.8em;"><a id="FRAGMENTS"/>FRAGMENTS</span><br/>
<br/>
I<br/>
<br/>
And since I understood not what so strong<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Driveth all these at such exstatic pace,</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">I too went down and joined in the throng;</span><br/>
And many sitting in a lowly place<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">I saw, where sense and vision darkness clogs,</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">With one flat-breasted wife with munched face</span><br/>
And bestial litter as of rats or hogs;<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">These are all they that eat and multiply</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">In the same manner with low apes and dogs;</span><br/>
Like these they live and like these they shall die.<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">—Pass thou from these, said then to me that voice,</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">And heed not thou the stinking of that sty.</span><br/>
Then saw I them that did with wine rejoice,<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Crowning their heads with roses of the earth;</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">I too sat down and joined in that noise,</span><br/>
But ask'd me soon—Why do all these have mirth?<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">From these I past, weary of myrrh and wine.</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Others apart whose spirits had more dearth</span><br/>
Sat solitary as who would fain divine,<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Of seeing and of hearing ill content;</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">With these I sat, half drunken with the vine,</span><br/>
And sick of visions that aye came and went;<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">But all the knowledge that their striving found</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Was but one vision more than wine had sent;</span><br/>
All these also shall moulder in the ground.<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">From these I past as from dead flesh and bones.</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Then came I where the kings of earth sat crown'd</span><br/>
Neath purple canopies on golden thrones;<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">These offer'd me part in that changeless state,</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Until my soul wearied of brass and bronze.</span><br/>
Others whose sweating nothing could abate<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Kingdoms and cities build and overthrow,</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Till my soul wonder'd at the striving great</span><br/>
Of all the puppets in that puppet-show:<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">—Doth the string move them with such urgency,</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">That all their limbs such strange grimaces show?</span><br/>
—These are all they that do, one made reply;<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">In all their actions never could I find</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">What they were doing these things for nor why.</span><br/>
From these I past as from the deaf and blind,<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">And ever as I went the solemn brawl</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Of all these mad and idiot howl'd behind.</span><br/>
I came to those that ceased not to call.<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">The world unto them, shouting o'er and o'er:</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">My heart knew not why these so loudly bawl;</span><br/>
And some stood round with faces that implore,<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Asking for peace; and ever those that gave</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Did but like these delude themselves the more;</span><br/>
But rottenness shall stop all these that rave.<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Last, some there were that did with vanity</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Toil ever with unwearied hands to save</span><br/>
And to eternize all things great and high;<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">With these I stay'd, till my heart questioned:</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">—What are the things thou doëst here and why?</span><br/>
Whereat all these became as persons dead.<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Then I arose from among these the last,</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">And follow'd then where'er my footsteps led;</span><br/>
And among them that reigned then I past,<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">And among them that ever fain would know,</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">And among them whose lot with wine was cast;</span><br/>
I past the prophets and the puppet-show,<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">And among them that joy'd in marble and in song,</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">And all that Seven tir'd of long ago.</span><br/>
And is this all the meaning of that throng,<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">This all, O heart, that wast of seeing fain,</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">But like a circle that still seemeth long</span><br/>
Because it goeth round and round again?<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Not in all these doth any reason hide</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">No more than in the words of the insane.</span><br/>
There is no ground for sorrow; nor in pride<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">For pride; nor in them that in gladness sate;</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Wherefore with none of these shall I abide.</span><br/>
The sought is vanity; the seeking great<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Vanity; the not-seeking vanity;</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">For none of these change I my solemn state.</span><br/>
<br/>
II<br/>
<br/>
Then since no one could answer unto me<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">The question, and since no one could me tell</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">The wherefore of this endless Vanity</span><br/>
Of all the spirits that on earth did dwell,<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">I said—I go unto the Absolute;</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">He will perchance release me from this hell.</span><br/>
Him that made noisy what before was mute<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">I found upon a heap of filthy dung</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Low-sitting in the fashion of the brute.</span><br/>
In strange grimaces still his face he wrung,<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Up to the chin within that filth immerst,</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Which still his busy hands about him flung.</span><br/>
—Do thou those clothes wherein he is inhearst<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Take off, said I to one, and do not shirk.</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">He did, while still that being howl'd and curst,</span><br/>
For there so thick and muddy was the murk,<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">And he still bore of clothes so thick a weight,</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">I knew not well what thing therein did lurk.</span><br/>
Three coverings then that one removed straight—<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Omniscience, Omnipresence, Omnipotence,</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">From off the thing that in the ordure sate.</span><br/>
Then did his truth show clear to every sense,<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">A filthy idiot so foul and low,</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">That decency the perfect tale prevents.</span><br/>
And I—O thou whose nakedness doth show<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Like one not in the womb to fulness brought,</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Why are all things that are; if thou dost know?</span><br/>
Then he replied from out the ordure hot:<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">—Brahma, great Brahma, Everlasting, I!</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">And I—Not such reply my question sought.</span><br/>
Answer thou me! And he still made reply:<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">—Brahma, great Brahma! repetition vain.</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">I asked again: and—Brahma! he did cry.</span><br/>
Then one thereby to me—Why art thou fain<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Knowledge to have from It? It knows not, It;</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Why seek for truth among the low insane?</span><br/>
Then he that did within the ordure sit<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Out of the filth that lay about his feet</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Such things as children make with little wit</span><br/>
Made, and then broke, and did the act repeat.<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">—I have made all the worlds, he gibbered;</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">And I his labour with these words did greet.</span><br/>
—Why dost thou these things? why, O why? I said.<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">No word vouchsaf'd the mouth of him that stank,</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">But giggling sounds and idiot uttered.</span><br/>
Then seated in that place of ordure rank,<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">With his two lips he made a cackling sound,</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">And back within the friendly ordure sank.</span><br/>
Then I with a great sad and awful voice<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Cried out—O thou that rottest in this sty,</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">O thou whose soul in ordure doth rejoice,</span><br/>
What art thou doing these things for and why?<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Then one to me—His bliss is not to know</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">The infiniteness of his own Vanity;</span><br/>
Therefore the soul of him that stinketh so,<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Because his sense is blind and deaf and mad</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Forever, knoweth not eternal woe.</span><br/>
Lo from the first his soul no reason had;<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">He thinketh he himself is everything,</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">And nothing is but him! He is not sad.</span><br/>
Ignorance, ignorance, shrouds him like a pall;<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Therefore thus low upon the fetid floor</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">He sits, and knoweth naught outside his stall.</span><br/>
And I—He maketh naught outside his store.<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Why doth he this? and in this fetid tomb</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Sitteth he here in madness evermore?</span><br/>
How long shall iron, awful, gnashing doom<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Leave him thus naked old and idiot</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Blind deaf and stinking, in the loathed gloom</span><br/>
How long shall This within the ordure squat?<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">How long shall This cease not to beck and nod</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">How long shall This cease not to rot and rot?</span><br/>
And he—This rottenness that seemeth God<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">More woe than this nor any other mode</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Shall know not, till It ceaseth in the sod.</span><br/>
And as a gnat, a viper, or a toad,<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Because its nature is not infinite,</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">It too shall perish in the worm's abode;</span><br/>
Till then It suppurateth in the night.<br/>
<br/>
III<br/>
<br/>
Then from the world I turn'd my steps afar;<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">I came there where the holy Trinity</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">And all the blessed saints in glory are,</span><br/>
And did the beatific vision see,<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">And how those happy are that once did mourn;</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">But my heart said—All this is naught to me;</span><br/>
Nor knew I why all these should be reborn.<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Where moon-fac'd houris wanton arms do fling</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Round Mahmud's blessed, I past by in scorn,</span><br/>
For my heart dream'd a deeper revelling.<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Then came I to that banquet more divine</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">That Jayadeva and that Jami sing;</span><br/>
And the fair goblet fill'd full of the wine<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Brought the cup-bearer clad with wantonness;</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">And there with the beloved and the vine</span><br/>
My heart grew weary of that blessedness.<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">From life I past, finding no joy therein.</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">The vision and the vine and drunkenness</span><br/>
Still like a circle ever closing in.<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Then I departed to the final peace,</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Sick of what is and shall be and hath been,</span><br/>
Of Brahma, as the drop sinks in the seas:<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">I past out from the bonds of thee-and-me,</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Lost in that Infinite whose being is</span><br/>
Glory in all things and reality;<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">But therein I that was not I, alas</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">In that deliverance from me-and-thee</span><br/>
Where all illusion fadeth like to grass,<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Found naught that equall'd my undimm'd desire;</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">—If that reality then real was,</span><br/>
What is that real more than trodden mire?<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Then from all being did my spirit pass,</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Sick of all being whether low or higher.</span><br/>
Out of that circle unto nothingness<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">I came, unto Nirvana, the far goal</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Of many a holy saint, where visions cease;</span><br/>
But nothingness did not my heart console.<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Ah not in nothingness is any peace,</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Nor in peace any peace, nor in the whole,</span><br/>
Nor in the vine nor in the vision, nor<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">In being nor non-being, nor in all</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">That man hath dream'd of and hath anguisht for.</span><br/>
Nay not in joy nor the vine jovial,<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Nor in the perfume of the lov'd one's breath,</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Nay nor in anything anywhere at all;</span><br/>
Nor in illusion; nor what sundereth<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Illusion; in the sundering of that chain</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">There is no joy; and not alas in death</span><br/>
Find I that thing whereof my soul is fain.<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">All these things also are all vanity</span><br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">No less than sun and stars that wax and wane</span><br/>
Forever in the everlasting sky.<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<span style="font-size: 0.8em;">ENVOI</span><br/>
<br/>
<span style="font-size: 0.8em;"><a id="AT_THE_END_OF_THE_CENTURY"/>AT THE END OF THE CENTURY</span><br/>
<br/>
<br/>
Now I am come to the nadir at last, to the absolute sorrow,<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Now all the stars are gone out of my sky;</span><br/>
Night everlasting is mine without hope or desire of the morrow,<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">All my life's hopes are gone tombwards to die.</span><br/>
All my life's glories lie perisht around me; and lo with great laughing<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Laugh I out loud, and I care not at all;</span><br/>
Here with mine Anguish, my Sorrow, my Madness, my Grief, I sit quaffing<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Wine, in high state in my echoing hall.</span><br/>
This is the last night I drink with you, maniac wassailers dreary!<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Lift up your goblets and drink ere I go!</span><br/>
Lo, I am easily bor'd, I am easily tired and made weary;<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Now at the last I am weary of Woe.</span><br/>
Lo, I that walk in the flower crown'd season of youthfulness golden,<br/>
Think ye that all things my gladness can slay?<br/>
Sorrow is fitting for dotards and them that are loathsome and olden;<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;"><i>I</i> am as one that goes ever away.</span><br/>
Lo, I laugh out at Grief, lo, I laugh in unending rejoicing,<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">I that have nightshade entwin'd in my hair;</span><br/>
Heart of me, what dost thou here in the wearisome darkness, revoicing<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Yesterday's stale and forgotten despair?</span><br/>
Now it is midnight; but soon shall the wakening glory of morning<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Shine in the East, when the darkness is gone;</span><br/>
Now in my spirit that sat for a time in the darkness of mourning<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Waketh in gladness the mystical dawn.</span><br/>
New spring laugheth without—to thy heart it is calling! and o'er thee<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Soon shall the banners of dawn be unfurl'd;</span><br/>
Wait thou no longer, O heart, O heart that art strong, for before thee<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Lieth the pomp of the great high world!</span><br/>
Now it is midnight; my Anguish, my Mourning, my Sadness, my Sorrow,<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Crown you with nightshade, and once more with me</span><br/>
Drink and make merry; farewell! I am here with you now; on the morrow<br/>
<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Sail I over the mighty sea.</span><br/>
</p>
<hr class="chap"/>
<h3> <a id="Postlude">Postlude</a></h3>
<p style="margin-left: 20%">
<span style="font-size: 0.8em;"><a id="SONG_OF_INDIA"/>SONG OF INDIA</span><br/>
<br/>
<br/>
Now at the last, Zulaikha, all my sorrows olden<br/>
Are farther off than Europe or than China seem,<br/>
And like an idle dream<br/>
The North is faded far off in the distance golden;<br/>
And here with thee I sit in perfect peace enfolden<br/>
Beside the Ganges-stream.<br/>
<br/>
Full well I knew that ne'er those northern promontories<br/>
Could give to me the dream that did my soul desire;<br/>
For there my heart did tire;<br/>
For always me allur'd the strangely whisper'd stories<br/>
Of skies that burn with more consuming languid glories,<br/>
And suns of mightier fire.<br/>
<br/>
I dream'd of heavier suns than burn in skies of ours,<br/>
And heavier airs that through the long long evening swoon<br/>
Under a larger moon,<br/>
And heavier-scented gardens fill'd with stranger flowers,<br/>
And tropic palms that wave through all the long long hours<br/>
Of endless afternoon.<br/>
<br/>
At last now from that northern dream am I awoken,<br/>
At last I am come home over the watery main;<br/>
Long long I sigh'd in vain;<br/>
Now under tropic palms I lie in peace unbroken,<br/>
And mine own land I see, beloved, and hear spoken<br/>
My natal tongue again.<br/>
<br/>
Zulaikha, past is all the longing and endeavour;<br/>
The palm-trees sleep, and sleeping move not any leaf;<br/>
Perisht is woe and grief;<br/>
Stilly the padmas float upon the holy river;<br/>
Among all these we two with languid eyes forever<br/>
Lie sunk in endless kief.<br/>
<br/>
Before us riseth white our marble-builded palace;<br/>
Thou hast let fall from out thy hands that weary are<br/>
The volume of Attár.<br/>
Thy hand hath spill'd the wine within the silver chalice;<br/>
Upon the river winding through the distant valleys<br/>
Sleepeth the nénufar.<br/>
<br/>
From out the oleanders languid slumber steepeth,<br/>
And thou, Zulaihka, dost, in rest too deep for dream,<br/>
Like one enchanted seem;<br/>
Thy beauty now in waking slumber sunken sleepeth,<br/>
And dreaming past thy wholly closed eyelids creepeth<br/>
The sleepy-flowing stream.<br/>
<br/>
Thou hast the light of Asia in thy face divinest,<br/>
And in thy scented mouth and in thy lotus-eyes,<br/>
O wine of Paradise!<br/>
O moon-fac'd love that by the sacred stream reclinest,<br/>
Hath this world anything for which in vain thou pinest?<br/>
That thing shall be thy prize.<br/>
<br/>
The caravans that in the desert, heavy-laden,<br/>
By unknown oases pitch their sun-blacken'd tents,<br/>
Shall bring thee all sweet scents<br/>
Wherein delight in heaven the houris ever-maiden—<br/>
Patchouli, nard, and myrrh, from many a distant aden<br/>
Of heavenly indolence.<br/>
<br/>
All kinds of gems wherefore thine almond eyes have yearning,<br/>
In heaps, wherein to bathe thy beauties languorous,<br/>
O maiden amorous,<br/>
They shall bring home to thee from distant isles returning—<br/>
Pearl, sapphire, diamond, topaz, and ruby burning,<br/>
And opal luminous.<br/>
<br/>
Thou art that sweet whereof all poets dead have chaunted,<br/>
Therefore my soul hath sought thy face o'er pathless seas,<br/>
Here to have endless peace;<br/>
Thou art the garden of delight with slumber haunted,<br/>
Thy perfume maketh dream of desert lands enchaunted,<br/>
And far-off oases.<br/>
<br/>
Thou hast that beauty in thine all-consuming glances<br/>
That openeth the ways to far enchanted skies,<br/>
And in thy lotus-eyes<br/>
Thou hast the light that shineth in the countenances<br/>
Of them whose eyes have seen the glory which entrances<br/>
The blest of Paradise.<br/>
<br/>
Thou art all sweets that unto perfect joy devote us,<br/>
In thee all spices and all scents together come,<br/>
O lute that now art dumb!<br/>
Thou art musk, frankincense, amomum, stephanotis,<br/>
Thou art the fragrant wine, the paradisal lotus,<br/>
Thou art the opium.<br/>
<br/>
Hashsheesh nor opium are worth not thy caresses,<br/>
Sweeter than opium to still the spirit's drouth<br/>
Thine unassuaged mouth;<br/>
Him that hath known thy love no mortal grief distresses;<br/>
Sweeter thy kisses are than incense which oppresses<br/>
The breezes of the South....<br/>
<br/>
At last I am come home, come home; and all regretting<br/>
Is with the North afar from thee and me away.<br/>
Behold O love, the day<br/>
Is past, in Indian skies the holy sun is setting;<br/>
The mûzin from his tower calleth unforgetting,<br/>
The faithful ones to pray.<br/>
<br/>
Under the velvet night wide India reposes<br/>
Now in the scented dark the champak odours swoon;<br/>
Slowly the summer moon<br/>
Riseth into the azure night made drunk with roses;<br/>
And lo the camel-bells, now that the daylight closes,<br/>
Tinkle their quiet tune.<br/>
<br/>
Behold, O well-beloved, 'neath the moonlight gleaming<br/>
The travellers depart from out the sleeping khan,<br/>
O perfume Asian!<br/>
And past the moonlit palace, where we two lie dreaming,<br/>
With camels and with horsemen like to shadows seeming<br/>
Departs the caravan.<br/>
<br/>
It is the starting hour, O most melancholy!<br/>
In long procession underneath the moon's pale gleams,<br/>
Like something that but seems,<br/>
The caravan departeth to the desert slowly,<br/>
There far afar to seek through endless time the holy<br/>
Mirages of their dreams.<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<span style="font-size: 0.8em;"><a id="DEDICATION"/>DEDICATION</span><br/>
<br/>
<br/>
These paltry rhymes, which loftier shall pursue<br/>
Than aught America of high or great<br/>
Hath seen since first began her world-wide state,<br/>
I dedicate, my brother, unto you.<br/>
</p>
<hr class="chap"/>
<p class="center">ITE MISSA EST</p>
