<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Part I</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-1" epub:type="part">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Part</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
			</h2>
			<article id="ashtoreth" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Ashtoreth</h3>
				<p>
					<span>In thy blue pallid gown that shimmereth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So pale thou standest in the wan moonlight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where the gold censer near thy body white</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wraps thee around with its perfumed breath;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So wan thy high tiara glimmereth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Above thy mystical far eyes of light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou seemest some dead goddess of the night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O starry love, O changeless Ashtoreth.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Pallid thou standest in thy divinity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like some moon-idol of the buried time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before whose face priests sing in solemn chime.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So I prostrate before thy deity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto thy face have solemn praises sung,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in my hands a golden censer swung.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="parfait-amour" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Parfait Amour</h3>
				<p>
					<span>It is not that thy face is fair</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As dying sunsets are,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor that thy lovely eyelids wear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The splendour of a star;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis the deep sadness of thine eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath my heart captive led,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that within thy soul I prize</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The calmness of the dead.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O holy love, O fair white face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O sweet lost soul of thine!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy bosom is an altar-place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy kisses holy wine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sweet incense offer’d for my bliss</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is thy corrupted breath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on thy stained lips I kiss</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The holy lips of Death!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Wherefore because thy heart is all</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fill’d full of mournfulness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thy gold head as with a pall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hung o’er with sinfulness;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because thy soul is utterly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sinful unto the core⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore my heart is bound to thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dear love, forevermore!</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="opium" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Opium</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Naught is more sweet than gently to let dream</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The pallid flower of life asleep alway;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where the dim censer sends up far from day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unceasingly its still-ascending stream,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O where the air winds its myrrh-scented steam</span>
					<br/>
					<span>About thy naked body’s disarray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall not today’s gold to thy shut eyes seem</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Born and forgot in the dead ages gray?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Sunk from life’s mournful loud processional,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For thee shall not with high uplifted urn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Night pour out dreams that awake and say,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>—We were, O pallid maiden vesperal,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before the world; we also in our turn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By the vain morning gold scatter’d away.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sombre-sonnet" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Sombre Sonnet</h3>
				<p>
					<span>I love all sombre and autumnal things,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Regal and mournful and funereal,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Things strange and curious and majestical,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whereto a solemn savor of death clings:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Coerulian serpents mark’d with azure rings;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Awful cathedrals where rich shadows fall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hoarse symphonies sepulchral as a pall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mad crimes adorn’d with bestial blazonings.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therefore I love thee more than aught that dies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within whose subtile beauty slumbereth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The twain solemnity of life and death;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therefore I sit beside thee far from day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And look into thy holy eyes alway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy desolate eyes, thine unillumin’d eyes.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="languor" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Languor</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Although thy face be whiter than the dawn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fairer than aught the dawning hath descried,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hast thou not now, O dear love deified,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Enough of kisses upon thy forehead wan?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The days and nights, like beads to pray upon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pass by before our eyes and not abide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so these things shall be till we have died,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until our bodies to the earth are gone.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I think how pleasant such a thing must be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That all thy lovely limbs should fall away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And drop to nothing in their soft decay.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then may thy buried body turn to me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With new love on thy changed lips like fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And kiss me with a kiss that shall not tire.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="ennui" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Ennui</h3>
				<p>
					<span>I sat in tall Gomorrah on a day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Boring myself with solitude and dreams,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When, like strange priests, with sacerdotal tread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The seven mortal sins, in rich array,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Came in and knelt: one old, and weak, and gray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One that was shrouded like a person dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And one whose robes cast reddish-purple gleams</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon her scornful face at peace alway.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They swung before me amschirs of strange gold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And one most beautiful began to pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dreamily garmented in pallid blue.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But I said only⁠—I have dream’d of you.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Naught really is; all things are very old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And very foolish. Please to go away.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="litany" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Litany</h3>
				<p>
					<span>All the authors that there are bore Me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All the philosophies bore Me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All the statues and all the temples bore Me;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>—All the authors that there are bore Thee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All the philosophies bore Thee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All the statues and all the temples bore Thee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All the women of the earth weary Me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fruit of the vine wearieth Me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All the symphonies weary Me.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>—All the women of the earth weary Thee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fruit of the vine wearieth Thee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All the symphonies weary Thee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Victory and defeat fatigue Me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gladness and sorrowing fatigue Me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Life and death fatigue Me.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>—Victory and defeat fatigue Thee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gladness and sorrowing fatigue Thee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Life and death fatigue Thee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The earth and the heavens weary Me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sun by day and the moon by night weary Me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All the great stars of heaven weary Me.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>—The earth and the heavens weary Thee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sun by day and the moon by night weary Thee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All the great stars of heaven weary Thee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The glorious company of the Apostles tireth Me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The goodly fellowship of the Prophets tireth Me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The noble army of Martyrs tireth Me.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>—The glorious company of the Apostles tireth Thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The goodly fellowship of the Prophets tireth Thee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The noble army of Martyrs tireth Thee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All the race of men weary Me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Cherubim and the Seraphim weary Me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Myself wearieth Me.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>—All the race of men weary Thee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Cherubim and the Seraphim weary Thee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thyself wearieth Thee.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="harvard" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Harvard</h3>
					<p epub:type="subtitle">On His Twenty-First Year</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>Tired Muse, put faded roses on thy brow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Put thy bare arms about the harp, and sing:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—I am a little bor’d with everything.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Past the clos’d jalousies the mlengkas go;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They are not beautiful; no Greek they know;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They go about and howl and make a fuss;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I gaze through <i>sâd</i>-shap’d eyelids languorous,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far off from Ispahân where roses blow.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Professors sit on lofty stools upcurl’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through Yankee noses drooling all day long;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I find all these things quite ridiculous.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Before despis’d old age comes over us,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let us step into the great world ere long.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We shall be very grand in the great world!</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="pride" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Pride</h3>
				<p>
					<span>They come and go, they pass before my soul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Desire and Love, weak Anguish and Distress,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shame and Despair: in phantom crowds they press,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Life’s poor processional, Time’s lowly dole.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Mournful their voices as slow bells that toll,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Voices of them that curse and do not bless;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ineffable things wrapp’d round with loathsomeness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The deeds that I have done in Fate’s control.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They leer and moan, they shriek and threat and lower,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ignoble faces that the sky do mar;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My changeless soul from her high pride of power</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Looks down unmov’d. So the calm evening star</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the wallowing peaceless sea looks down,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Set far aloft within the heaven’s crown.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="son-of-golden-youth" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Song of Golden Youth</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Quelle bêtise! O Muse, no longer lappt in sadness let us lie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bring the jars of old Falernum, bring the roses ere they die!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I love laughter, I love kisses, I love Lili, I love love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But these dingy funeral dirges ennuyer us by-and-by;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fellows, disinvoltamente, when the lords of life depart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lift the wine-cup to your haughty lips, and sing, Goodbye, goodbye!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We have laughter on our lips, and in our hearts the laughing spring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nothing greatly can afflict us, nor our spirits mortify;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All the laws and regulations under scornful feet we tread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We laugh loud at all the virtues underneath the shining sky;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have heard, when haughty Tarquin did his horrid deed of sin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That Lucretia’s lily fingers slapp’d his face vivaciously;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though of all my life dear Lili make a gay dégringolade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet to my ennuis doth Lili sing an endless lullaby;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We are Greeks and we are Tartars, we know all the languages,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the girls of Persia, India, China, we know how to sigh;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If the heartless heart of Lili tediously cruel prove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Go and dance the tarantella with the girls of Hôkusai!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the golden-citied world from Paris unto Tokiô</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We are quite at home, we saunter languidly through tall Shanghai;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Chairete! the shaw of rosy Persia is a gentleman,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Charming people in Benares where the Ganges loiters by;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Allah akbar! O great world, O golden-tower’d cities gay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into all your gates with laughter and with roses enter I!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Kalliste, your Persian ghazal cease to sing: the sun is low,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the sacred hour of absinthe now is very very nigh.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="mais-moi-je-vis-la-vie-en-rouge" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Mais Moi Je Vis La Vie en Rouge</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Your soul is like a purple flower,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mary, whose eyes are amethyst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose lips are like red wine when kist,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With sweet life and sweet death for dower;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There are who will have none of these,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who walk in peace all day upright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in the night pray on their knees⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The pleasures of the life in white.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All cloth’d with virtues manifold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are these⁠—their souls are like white snow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fair love, around thy heart I know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My heart is bound with chains of gold.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sweet youths whose life is in the spring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The water is all wine they drink,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They sorrow not at anything⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The pleasures of the life in pink.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Your gold hair’s like an aureole,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Your lips are gold wine bought and sold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pure golden kisses bought for gold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each breast is like a golden bowl.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These things are for a scorn to those</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That read great books both night and day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That say, Joy dieth as the rose⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The pleasures of the life in gray.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Sweet youths, white ladies, scholars sour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rejoice, and hasten on your way;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mary, whose skin is white as whey,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your soul is like a purple flower.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="louanges-delle" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Louanges d’Elle</h3>
				<p>
					<span>—O Muse of mine that sittest orientally</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With a green emerald snake about the waist of thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With henna-tinted feet, and almond eyes that dream,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Put down the opium-pipe of jade and ivory,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For she that is most fair is fain to hear thy song:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Awake, O Muse, and sing her praises solemnly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That to the laughing heart of California</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath added all the grace of France and Italy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She who, to put to sleep my pitiless ennuis</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is come from distant Paris and from Varsovie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Athens is in her heart, and Paris in her eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dear European angel from beyond the sea!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>—There is no use to sing; she is not to be sung;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What mortal praise can come unto her glory near?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And she hath quite forgot her natal English tongue;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She is too far, too high, thy languid praise to hear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Too delicate, too strange, too wicked, too divine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Too heavenly, too sweet, too bad, too fair, too dear!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<i>‘N’est-elle pas l’oasis où tu rêves et la gourde</i>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<i>Où tu humes à longs traits le vin du souvenir?’</i>
					</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="helas" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Hélas</h3>
				<p>
					<span>—Why sittest thou, O Muse, in grief enfolden?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—Thou hast me promis’d jewels rich and rare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To wear within my hair;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for my slaves the kings of kingdoms olden;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And to abide in lofty castles golden,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because I am most fair.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lo, I have no sandals for my feet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And little bread to eat.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Of that far golden Irem I am dreaming,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence for few kisses I did follow thee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fair is that spot to see,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With far-off waving palms and towers gleaming;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Great deserts round that isle of blissful seeming</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lie stretching endlessly.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-1" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Sonnet</h3>
				<p>
					<span>When I contemplate how my state is low,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And how my pride that had the earth for throne</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In this dark city sitteth all alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My heart is fain for death to end its woe;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then when I think how all the great below</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had only sorrow and grief through all their days,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I, that with these shall some time stand in place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My fortune like their bitter fortune know.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Among whom also holy Baudelaire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though unto him the loftiest lot was given</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To hear the blessed muses sing in heaven,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Past his few days in anguish and despair;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet did he not bow down his mournful head</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until Peace found him in his glory dead.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So thou in this low lair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Although in sorrow and grief thou dost remain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though of all things whereof thy soul was fain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Remaineth only pain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet be not thou, O soul, disconsolate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forget not thou thy far-exalted state.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-2" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Sonnet</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Be not cast down my heart, and be not sad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That thou like common men must sorrow know;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not only they that live and die below,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But ev’n the gods thy supreme sorrow had;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Not unto Tammuz was this fortune given,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not to know grief; whom starry Ashtoreth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sought through the seven-gated realm of death,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far from the great moon and the stars of heaven.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Osiris also could not but to die;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He reigneth king among the perisht dead;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Christ, when his long grief was finished,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Hid his great glory in the lowly ground.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All these had sorrow, that were great and high;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These also were august, these also crown’d.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="rondeau" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Rondeau</h3>
				<p>
					<span>As shadows pass, in the misty night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Over the wan and moonlit grass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So passeth our glory out of sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As shadows pass.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A little darkness, a little light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sorrow and gladness, a weary mass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Glimmer and falter and pass in blight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So all our life, in waning flight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fadeth and faltereth, alas;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Passeth our sorrow and our delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As shadows pass.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="autumn-song" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Autumn Song</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Weep, far autumnal skies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shrouded in misty air;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Weep, for thy solemn dearth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And for thy chill despair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Earth.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O stricken forest-trees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dead leaves that falter down</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Solemnly to your sleep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Golden, and red, and brown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Weep.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="ballad" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Ballad</h3>
				<p>
					<span>The lady rode ’neath the strange sky’s pall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through the leafy woods funereal,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the length of her moonlit way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was wanly white as the light of day;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Solemnly rob’d she rode along,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unmindful of their droning throng</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That throng’d her shadowy path, alas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As though to see her funeral pass;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So through the mournful forest slow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her palfrey’s silken feet did go,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bearing her solemnly like a god</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Over the shadow-haunted sod;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She laught to see the dead desire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That even now her life should tire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She laught to think that to the earth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They call’d her that was full of mirth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And though before her horse’s head</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Throng’d the wan legions of the dead</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wanly attempting to stop her way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She halted not for their legions gray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But rode through the midnight’s mystic noon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under the far gaze of the moon.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then out from the dying woods at last</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the moonlit plain she passt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The misty stars were almost dead</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sunk in the heavens overhead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While low down in the solemn skies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The white moon wan’d as one that dies.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Solemnly through the misty air</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She rode with gold gems in her hair;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bright were her holy eyes divine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And red her lips as the red red wine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At last in the unceasing night</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Down from her palfrey she doth alight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By the strange murmuring of the sea;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She climbs the tall stair fearlessly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And cometh at last to her chamber high</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beneath the wide face of the sky.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At last her journey being done,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She hath her golden stays undone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And being a little wearied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath laid her naked on her bed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thinking to slumber like the dead.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="changelessness" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Changelessness</h3>
				<p>
					<span>When Death shall touch thy body beautiful,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thou that art of all the earth most fair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shalt close thine eyes upon the shining air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An unadorned gold urn to make full;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When that thou liest quietly inurn’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the dark bosom of the earth divine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Being turned unto a heap of ashes fine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For love of whose white face all men have burn’d;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then in the earth, O beautiful white love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy beauty shall not wholly end and cease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When that thou art gone to endless peace;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Though all things beneath the sky above</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fade away, it knoweth not to die,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But abideth changeless endlessly.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="madonna" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Madonna</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Anguish and Mourning are as gold to her;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She weareth Pain upon her as a gem,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on her head Grief like a diadem;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as with frankincense and tropic myrrh</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her face is fragrant made with utter Woe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on her purple gorgeous garment’s hem</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Madness and Death and all the ways of them</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Emblazoned in strange carousal show.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Within her delicate face are all things met,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the sad years and the dolorous days</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are but as jewels round her forehead set,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Add but a little glory to her face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A little languor to her half-clos’d eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That smile so strangely under the far skies.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="poppy-song" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Poppy Song</h3>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">O poppy-buds, that in the golden air</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wave heavy hanging censers of delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Give me an anodyne for my despair;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O crimson poppy-blooms, O golden blight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O careless drunken heavy poppy-flowers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Make that the day for me be as the night.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Give me to lie down in your drowsy bowers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That having breathed of your rich perfume,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My soul may have all-rest through all the hours;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So shall I lie within my little room,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While the poor tyrants of the world go by,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Restfully shrouded in your velvet gloom,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beneath the wide face of the cloudless sky.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>—Even so, when thou shalt eat of us,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even so, thy life shall be a sleep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Empty of all things fierce and piteous;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even as a sailor on the tossing deep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hears vaguely the vain tumult on the shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shouts of the fighters, songs of them that reap.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Life is all vanity, a loathed sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A scatter’d dust, a vain and soiled heap.⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou shalt have golden rest forevermore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">O poppy-flowers, golden, sleepy, sweet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O yellow tawny fading blooms of gold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Give unto me your holy fruit to eat;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Make me forget all things above the mould;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Make me forget that dolorous vow that sears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not to be lesser than the great of old;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Make me forget the heavy old dead years,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all that lives from out the writhing past,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Old struggles, dead ambitions, buried tears;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that white face that I shall see the last.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>—Sweet is forgetfulness, most sweet to lie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sunken from sorrow, in our pleasant vale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where but the sun shines, and the clouds go by;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even as to them that through deep waters sail</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The toiling shore fades and becomes a sky,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And evermore behind the billows fail.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sweet to forget the death-like things that were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Green pastures where the clouds sail by on high,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dead sundawns over pathless prairies fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And suns long sunk beneath the wall of the sky.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="i1">Under the sun my spirit lies alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Drunken with slumber and mild exstasy⁠ ⁠…</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sleep, sweet sleep, long unto mine eyes unknown.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Drops on me as ripe fruit drops from a tree;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My dim eyes see the valley poppy-strown;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The clouds fade and the gold sun over me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the world’s murmur sounds within my lair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like the far tossing of some infinite sea;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Within the heavy slumber-laden air</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All fades, all fades, and grows afar afar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leaving my soul alone, empty of care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even as happy long-dead bodies are.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even so I slumber in my tireless close,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While the whole world fades like a fading star,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dies like the perfume of a dying rose.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="consolation" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Consolation</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Among all sorrows that my heart hath known,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among all sorrows that my spirit keep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forever buried ’neath their mountains steep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Standeth one consolation, one alone.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I know that earth shall be for death a throne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And evermore within their burials deep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The banded nations of the earth shall sleep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sunken in sepulchres of sculptur’d stone.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then all the world shall be a quietness:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dead women beautiful with their delights;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All they that had such striving and distress,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And endless weariness in all the lands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>White faces, eager heart-strings, soiled hands;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And peace shall hold the valleys and the heights.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="liebes-tod" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Liebes-Tod</h3>
				<section id="liebes-tod-1">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h4>
					<p>
						<span>Thy splendour-lighted face before mine eyes</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shines like a flaming sunset evermore;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thee only I behold on the earth’s floor,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thee only I behold within the skies;</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Thy coming on is like a conqueror,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Before thy footsteps the world’s glory dies,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Within mine ears thy voice doth ever rise</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Like a loud ocean beating on the shore.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Thou art made kindred with eternity,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Daughter of glory, daughter of consolations;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy face is set above the constellations;</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Of Death! O love! be I made one with thee,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That on thy holy lips and in thy love</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The world may perish and the light thereof!</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="liebes-tod-2">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h4>
					<p>
						<span>Lo, now my life is gone unto eclipse</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Upon thy perilous bosom; lo, I die,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Faint with the utter whole of exstasy,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With unassuaged lips against thy lips,</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>That can give no more joy; lo, at the place</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of utter joy, lo, at joy’s far-off throne,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which none shall reach, with eyes now weary grown,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I lie slain at its utmost golden base.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Yea, we have call’d the white stars to behold</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Our pale and fainting faces sick with joy;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O regal lips that shall death’s sting destroy,</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>I have suck’d bare life’s cup upon thy breath!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Kiss me to death! Lo, now our lips are cold,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wilt thou not bring new joy, O Death, O Death?</span>
					</p>
				</section>
			</article>
			<article id="evening-song" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Evening Song</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Lo, all the passionate pale evening</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I lay between the breasts of my beloved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among the lilies, in the lily garden.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sky was pale, and all the sunset faded,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the stars I saw not in the heaven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because the glory of her face above me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I saw alone, wrapt in a dream of slumber;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lo, she was more fair than all the lilies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among the lilies, in the lily garden.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all her hair was golden chains to bind me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all her mouth was crimson fire to burn me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the world became as wind before me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But as the wind before her face that passes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among the lilies, in the lily garden.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lo, her face was fairer than the stars are,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lo, her breasts were whiter than the moon is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whiter than the moon, and tipp’d with crimson coral.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And low she bow’d her body, low before me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gave me of her joy unto fulfilling:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She bow’d her head whereto the stars do homage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before whose face the years wax dim and fading,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before whose eyes the ages pass and vanish;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bow’d her low down before me like a lily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among the lilies, in the lily garden.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now at last I care not if the morning</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Come at all, or the pale stars have setting,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nay I care not if the whole world perish,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perish and die, or if the white stars falter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nay I care not if the night forever</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hold me by her, and all things have ceasing;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yea, because her lips are more than roses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yea, because her breasts are more than Heaven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yea, because her face is more than God is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among the lilies, in the lily garden.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="song-of-the-stars-in-praise-of-her" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Song of the Stars in Praise of Her</h3>
				<p>
					<span>O starry light of the dim universe!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The night adoreth thee, the planets high</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That reign far off within the desert sky</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Praise thee as with the sound of dulcimers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the temples of the night rehearse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy solemn glory everlastingly!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O thou for whom the moon’s pale-lighted star</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the planets and the milky gleam,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But as a little of thy praising seem,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the great lights that swim through heaven afar</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But the reflection of thy glory are;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou only art; these are but shine and dream;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thou art that light that doth the stars illume,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou art the glimmer of the moon divine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All these are but the garment that is thine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou art the wonder and the glow, the bloom,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou art the lonely lamp in night’s great gloom,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou art the skyey light, the starry shine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Starlight is but the glory of thy face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The shimmer of the silver planets pale</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is but the dim effulgence of thy veil;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the great passing of the nights and days</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is all but as the perfume of thy praise.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Holy, Holy, Holy, hail, O hail!</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="aubade" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Aubade</h3>
				<p>
					<span>The lady awoke before the cold gray dawn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And had no joy thereof;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—What joy is mine of all the joy of love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When love is gone?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Lo, all the air is strange unto mine eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo, all the stars are dead;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Only the moon appeareth overhead</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As one that dies.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Lo, all the garden lieth desolate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And very strange to see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherein, the roses and the grass for me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blossom’d of late.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O rose-garden wherein my roses grew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O odorous dim ways,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why are ye strange to me as perish’d days,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And cold with dew?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Through the wide window creeps the cold sweet air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Faint with sweet rose-perfume,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It stealeth o’er my body in the gloom,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And o’er my hair.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Surely I have drunk full of love’s delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But now my lips are cold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While the pale day in silence doth behold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The dying night.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="remember" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Remember</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Remember, ye whom the skies delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose faces flame with the falling sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That after sunset cometh the night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That sorrow followeth all delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When love, and lover, and lov’d are one.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O ye whose days are as sands that run,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One house there is unknown of delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One garden is there belov’d of none,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One place there is unseen of the sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Remember, ye whom the skies delight.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="song-1" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Song</h3>
				<p>
					<span>She hath liv’d the life of a rose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She that was fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Blown on by the summer air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grown tall in a golden close.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>An ending is set to delight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now thou art as grass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As the leaves, as the blossoms that pass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made pale at the touch of the night.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="song-2" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Song</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Cometh a day and a night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When the lamps of life burn dim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When peace is secur’d for delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And poppies for the red-rose flower;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When the lamps of life burn dim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cometh a day and a night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A day and a night and an hour.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Cometh the end of the years,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When the cheeks have the lilies’ bloom,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When slumber is given for tears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the breasts to the worm belong;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When the cheeks have the lilies’ bloom,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cometh the end of the years,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As silence after the song.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Cometh a day and a night</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For him to whom all is thrown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose own is the bosom white,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose own are the lips of gold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For him to whom all is thrown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cometh a day and a night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To have and to own and to hold.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="constancy" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Constancy</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Surely thy face, love, is a little pale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And somewhat wan thy lips that were so red,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And though my kisses might raise up the dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To waken thy deep sleep they naught avail.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Before thy stillness some poor men might quail,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I shall not desert thy holy bed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Although thy passionate lips have no word said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thine adored breasts are cold like hail.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thou art gone down to Death, thou art gone down,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the dead things shall nestle in thy hair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the dust shall profane thy golden crown,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And the worms shall consume thy perfect face;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even so: but Death shall bring thee no disgrace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to the stars I cry, Thou art most fair!</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="requiem" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Requiem</h3>
				<p>
					<span>White-rose perfume</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Go with thee on thy way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto thy shaded tomb;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Low music fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lightly as autumn leaves</span>
					<br/>
					<span>About thy solemn pall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Faint incense rise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From many a censer swung</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Above thy closed eyes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the sounds of them that pray</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Make thy low bier an holy thing to be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That all the beauty underneath the sun</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Carries unto the clay.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Odour of musk and roses</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Make sweet thy crimson lips</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whereon my soul hath gone to deep eclipse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Poppies’ and violets’ scent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be for thy burial lent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And every flower that sweetest smell discloses.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon thy breast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before which all my spirit hath bow’d down,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>White lilies rest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for a crown upon thy mortal head</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be poppies red.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And for eternal peace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be poppies strown upon thy holy eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till also these shall cease</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Turning to that which man is when he dies.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And poppies on thine unassuaged mouth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be strown, until death shall be done with thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until the white worms shall be one with thee.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="autumn-burial" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Autumn Burial</h3>
				<p>
					<span>The moon shone full that night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fill’d with misty light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The solemn clouds hung white</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Above her pall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Waiting the golden dawn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The silent woods stood wan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While through their aisles mov’d on</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her funeral.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Palely their torches flare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While rob’d in white they bear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her corpse that was most fair</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of them that die,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By sleeping forests tall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And woods funereal</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through the decaying fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beneath the sky.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The orbed moon looks down</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon her golden crown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From out the forest brown</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wood-things stare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The holy stars behold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her woven hair of gold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And slumbering and cold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her bosom bare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The moon shines full o’erhead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And they with bowed head</span>
					<br/>
					<span>About her body dead</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In silence stand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There where no foot hath trod</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They bury her with sod</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alone with only God</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In all the land.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Tall forests stand around</span>
					<br/>
					<span>About her grassy mound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And over all the ground</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lie shadows hoar.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She ’neath the passing moon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sees not the shadows strewn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sunk in her golden swoon</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forevermore.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-of-burial" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Sonnet of Burial</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Now that the earth thy buried corpse doth hold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now that thy soul that hath so much desired,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is gone down to the places of the tired,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far from the dawning and the star-light cold;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thine eyes shall not again the sun behold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now shall thy body that all men hath fired</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have ceasing, and thy grave shall be admired,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That doth the fairest thing o’ the earth enfold.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now that thine ashes are all buried,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thou art gone to slumber with the blessed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy buried body shall be no more distressed;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Being now number’d with the placid dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thine eyes forever more have ceas’d from weeping,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For evermore thy spirit shall have sleeping.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="nocturne" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Nocturne</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Lo, how the moon, beloved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far in the heavens gleaming,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Over the ocean dreaming</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her pallid light doth throw;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Lo, where the endless ocean,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where softly the night wind bloweth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the darkness floweth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thither at last I go.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Listen, how sweet the ocean</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto our spirits sigheth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lo, where our pinnace lieth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Awaiting, with sails unfurl’d;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Come thou with me, beloved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Come thou with heart unquailing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There where no ships come sailing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Out of the dreary world.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Come thou with me, beloved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Out of the world and its seeming,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where all things are only dreaming,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shadows all we know;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The heart hath not found its longing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here, nor shall find it ever;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Behold of my life’s endeavour</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Remaineth only woe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Behold, my desire, my anguish,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Trouble and toil surpassing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are all but as shadows passing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shadows the fame thereof;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Here, where the heart attaineth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not, what the heart desireth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where beauty too early tireth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And kisses mean not love.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Here where what man hath desired,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He shall not find forever,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But ever and only ever</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unending vanity;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Not in this world, beloved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My only longing hideth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But in farther lands abideth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And over a wider sea.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There, when the spring shall blossom,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There, when the winter is vanisht,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My spirit that long was banisht</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall come to its home, though late;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There in mine olden kingdom,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where nothing is transitory,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I in exceeding glory</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall hold mine ancient state.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Here let us leave our anguish,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here at the hour of leaving,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leave we our woe and grieving</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like garments long outworn;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Leave we our mortal sorrow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our longing and our repenting,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The anguish and the lamenting</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That made our hearts to mourn.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Others may weep and anguish,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Others may talk of laughter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ever a little after</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sorrow is theirs the more;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But we two have done with laughter</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sadness that hath no reason,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We two in the springtime season</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Push out from the weary shore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Past are the storms of winter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Past is the rainy weather,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Past are the snows, together</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With sadness and sorrowing;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Past are the rains, beloved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Past is the time of weeping,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lo, o’er the green earth sleeping,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Laugheth the world-wide Spring!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Come thou with me, beloved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O let us now be starting!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All things, at the hour of parting,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall be made new for thee;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Listen, how sweet the ocean</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto our spirits calleth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Softly the starlight falleth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Over the dreaming sea.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Fadeth the land, beloved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That long hath our spirits tired,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before us lies that desired</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far country, strange and new;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Far off lies that dream’d-of country</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eternally fair and blessed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eternally undistressed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far over the ocean blue.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Knowst thou the land, beloved?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Year-long with gentle motion</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There the unending ocean</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Batheth the tropic shore;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There never storms blow loudly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There never wet rain falleth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There never loud wind calleth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor stormy waters roar.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Fairer the stars that lighten</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There, than to us is given,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There in a fairer heaven</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shineth a larger moon;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Fair stand the castles golden</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There, and o’er stranger flowers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There through the long long hours</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wandering breezes swoon.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There in that land, beloved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is never a sound of living,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Never is heard thanksgiving</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There, nor the noise of moan;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There naught is heard of sorrow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And nothing is there begotten;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There, with all life forgotten,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We two shall come alone.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There, O my one beloved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through twilight never-closing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We two shall sit reposing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forever, thou with me;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There ’neath the stars eternal,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We two shall sit, we only,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While from the heavens, lonely,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The moon sinks in the sea.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
