<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Part II</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-2" epub:type="part">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Part</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
			</h2>
			<article id="mad-sonnet" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Mad Sonnet</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Lo, in the night I cry out, in the night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>God! and my voice shall howl into the sky!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am weary of seeing shapeless things that fly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And flap into my face in their vile flight;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I am weary of dead things that crowd into my sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am weary of hearing horrible corpses that cry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>God! I am weary of that lidless Eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That comes and stares at me, O God of light!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All, all the world is become a dead blur,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>God! God! and I, stricken with hideous blight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Crouch in the black corners, and I dare not stir.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I am aweary of my evil plight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If thou art not a dead corpse in thy sky,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Send thou down Death into my loathed sty!</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="the-house-of-youth" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The House of Youth</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Far in the melancholy hills it stands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Far off; and through the vista of the years,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Down which my soul its helpless journey steers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It flames a fire to lighten all the lands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A fire that burns me and a flame that brands</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Me, whose dead days pass slow as heavy tears.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The road my footsteps tread is dim and still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There darkness abides and silence endlessly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the low way mine eyes can scarcely see;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet the light and sound from that far hill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like the sky’s fire my weary pathway fill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that it seems a place of life to be.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The world is but a background for it there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There where it stands, loud like a beaten lyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And flames blood-red like some vast funeral-pyre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whereat my heart to fail doth not forbear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all the things that have been made soe’er</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Only the House remains, a quenchless fire.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ah God, that this thing were not in the world⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The hateful House that flames with light and song</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And weary singing all the ages long;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah that ev’n this might in the dust be hurl’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And crush’d and slain, even as my heart, where curl’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The kindly armies of the worm do throng.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yea, surely I have seen it long ago,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Far sunken in the weary dust of time;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yea surely even that stair so hard to climb</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I climb’d, and strode its hallways to and fro;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The which were bright with many lamps aglow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And loud with choristers in ceaseless chime.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="de-profundis" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title" xml:lang="la">De Profundis</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Out of the grave, O God, I call to thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be thou not deaf unto my dolorous cry;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My soul is fallen down into the sty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the dead things are crawling over me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O thou my God, give me the worm to flee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out from the pit’s depths I would rise on high.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Again am I fallen down into the grave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My soul is sunken in the place of slime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I am too weak its loathed walls to climb,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou, only thou, O God, art strong to save;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo, in mine eyes the worms have made their cave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And squatting toads oppress me all the time.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yea, from this pit I have crawl’d out before;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With groans and cries and many a dolorous fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I have climbed up its impregnable wall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I shall not rise now from its slimy floor;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O God, hear thou my lamentable call,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or from the grave I come not evermore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I am become a housing for the toad;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All things are fled wherein I took delight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There is no joy here, and there is no light;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O God, O God, I have reap’d what I sow’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am become a dead thing in the night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in my heart the worms have their abode.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Lo, from my body all my might is fled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the light is gone out of mine eyes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mine ears hear only lamentable cries,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eyeless things stand round about my head;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am made as a man that slowly dies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I am made as a man already dead.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="prayer" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Prayer</h3>
					<p epub:type="subtitle">In Time of Plague</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>Holy Pestilence, holy Pestilence, gird thee with might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Holy Pestilence, come thou upon them, come thou at night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Holy Pestilence, put on thy mantle, put on thy crown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Holy Pestilence, come on the cities, come and strike down,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Holy Pestilence, let them all perish, touch’d with thy breath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Holy Pestilence, let them grow rotten, moulding in death,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Holy Pestilence, put on thy garments, a crown on thy head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Holy Pestilence, let all the nations fall at thy tread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Holy Pestilence, let them all perish, let them be dead.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Holy Pestilence, then shall the cities sink with thy might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Holy Pestilence, they shall lie desert, plague-struck at night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Holy Pestilence, then shall the rulers, crown’d with a crown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Holy Pestilence, feeling them stricken, reel and fall down,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Holy Pestilence, then shall the nations faint with thy breath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Holy Pestilence, then shall the valleys be cover’d with death,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Holy Pestilence, peasant with ruler, body with head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Holy Pestilence, all shall be stricken under thy tread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Holy Pestilence, all shall be rotten, all shall be dead.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sestettes" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Sestettes</h3>
				<section id="sestettes-1">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h4>
					<p>
						<span>Thou shalt rejoice for woe:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The pallid goblet old,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That holds thy life’s dull wine,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is made thereby divine;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Stain’d with a purpler glow,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And wrought in stranger gold.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="sestettes-2">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h4>
					<p>
						<span>From the suck’d lees of pain,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>We have won joy again:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Death shall thee not distress:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That sleepy bitterness</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To thy kist lips shall be</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The supreme exstasy.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="sestettes-3">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h4>
					<p>
						<span>Put ashes on your golden body bare,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Puissant as musk, bitter-sweet as to die,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ashes upon your arms that grow not old,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And on your unassuaged lips of gold:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So we will wanton in love’s sepulchre,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And mock the face of Death with blasphemy.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="sestettes-4">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h4>
					<p>
						<span>I love you more than Death: your mournful head,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Your shrouding hair, and your unfathom’d eyes,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And your white body beautiful, alas,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Priestess and victim in love’s holy mass⁠ ⁠…</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Your flesh that loves, and loving ever dies⁠ ⁠…</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I could not love you more if you were dead.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="sestettes-5">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</h4>
					<p>
						<span>Death is death; the little host that squirms,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The smell, the dark, the coffin clos’d, and I</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So soft, so soft; no movement, and no breath;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No ears, no nose, no eyeballs; Death is Death;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The sepulchre, no sight, no sound, no cry,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And always; Death is Death; the worms! the worms</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="sestettes-6">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</h4>
					<p>
						<span>Not for your evil is my spirit sad⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I mourn because you are not really bad;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Because your beauty’s perfect cruelty</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is ever marr’d with pity and distress,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And you still show within your wickedness</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The poor stale weakness of humanity.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="sestettes-7">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</h4>
					<p>
						<span>I am as one that thirsteth for all things,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As one that holdeth to his lips the cup,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With lower’d eyes searching the wine’s dull flame.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No thing may I refuse among all things,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Till, having drain’d unto its dregs the cup,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I may return into the astral flame.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="sestettes-8">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</h4>
					<p>
						<span>Heart, we have wholly drain’d the cup of sadness,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And found in sadness no reality;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Now from the night of sadness let us go.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Henceforward let us drain the cup of gladness,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And find in gladness no reality;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From sadness then and gladness let us go.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
			</article>
			<article id="sonnet-of-the-instruments-of-death" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Sonnet of the Instruments of Death</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Adorned daggers, ruby-hilted swords;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Huge mortal serpents in gold volumes roll’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All-holy poisons in wrought cups of gold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unfailing crucifixes of strong cords;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Mortal baptismal waters without fords,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherein lie death’s communicants untold⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which of these instruments blessed and old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is meetest for life’s purple-robed lords?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ye that commune in death’s ciborium,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all the vessels in his sacristy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which will ye choose to make of you a clod⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Sharp swords, bright lightnings, orient opium?⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All these, brave souls, are of one sanctity;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All ways are good whereby ye pass to God.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="truth" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Truth</h3>
				<p>
					<span>It is not that I have not sought thy face</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ceaselessly through the world’s eternal lie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More than all things and throughout every place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which having seen I were content to die.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But I have sought thee and I have not found;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherefore my soul is banish’d from delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sitteth joyless as a madman bound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seeing vain visions in the loathed night.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I know not even that I do not know,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But all things waver before me to and fro;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As one half head that would be dead I lie.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And thou, Death, if thy face be really fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I know not, or but renewal of vanity;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherefore mine eyes have seen the last despair.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="hegel" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Hegel</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Because my hope is dead, my heart a stone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I read the words that Hegel once did write⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An idiot gibbering in the dark alone⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till on my heart and vision fell the night.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="monotony" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Monotony</h3>
				<p>
					<span>A dead corpse full of wormy questionings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beneath the open sky my soul lies dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shameless and rotten and unburied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For whom eternity no difference brings.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Only the wind my loathed incense flings</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Afar afar; only above my head</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Day passes, night returns when day is fled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unchangeable return of changeless things.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Unto the dead all things bring only pain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And evermore my perish’d heart is woe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For the vile worms that gnaw it lying low;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>While the dead days, like to an endless chain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pass ever o’er my body cruelly slow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And evermore with pain return again.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sepulture" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Sepulture</h3>
				<p>
					<span>My heart is but a tomb, where vain and cold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My dead hopes lie: encoffin’d there my Pride</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lies dead, and my Life’s Gladness crucified,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And there my Morning Joy long turn’d to mould;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And there like once-lov’d corpses dead and old</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My Victory that long long since hath died,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all my Hopes lie shrouded side by side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For whom no eyes have wept, no dirges toll’d.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And there insensate on the darken’d floor</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Despair a maniac still doth howl and scream,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among all these long dead alive alone;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Among these things I sit upon a throne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In endless contemplation evermore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor these suffice to break my iron dream.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="miserrimus" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title" xml:lang="la">Miserrimus</h3>
				<p>
					<span>In the last hopeless depth of hell’s dark tomb</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherein I sit for aye with bowed head</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In anguish and great sorrow buried</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where never sun the blackness doth illume,</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I saw pass by me through the bitter gloom</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All them whom life with deepest grief hath fed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom also here among the hopeless dead</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through hell pursueth maniac, gnashing doom.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Me there forever crusht to hopeless stone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They passt by, all the damn’d; they shall not know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through all eternity but only woe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now hear no sound but sound of them that groan.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And unto me that sat than these more low,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These seem’d like happy gods that heaven own;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They past away; and there in hell alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My heart took up again its ancient woe.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="scorn" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Scorn</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Dead am I, and ye triumph o’er me dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye that within mine eyes have found your home,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye that are soft and blind and white like foam,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye that have made of me your meat and bread.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Unto the worms I am abandoned;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Over my flesh their loathed cohorts roam;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon my heart whereto their hosts have clomb</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their hungry lips shall evermore be fed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Here am I but a dead corpse in a tomb;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I shall not out from my accurs’d abode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Inhabited by the dull worm and the toad;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ye vile sojourners in my rotten room,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Torment me with your everlasting goad!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I scorn you till the end shall come of doom.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="the-grave" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Grave</h3>
				<p>
					<span>The loathed worms are crawling over me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All the dead hours; about my buried head</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their soft intolerable mouths are gathered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in my dead eyes that have ceas’d to see.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am full of worms and rotten utterly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dead, dead, dead, dead, dead, dead, dead, dead, dead, dead.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The lifeless earth lies close against mine eyes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I know that I have rotted long ago;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My limbs are made one with the worms I know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where all my head and body putrifies.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So in the earth my coffin’d ordure lies</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Within my loathed shambles strait and low.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There is no thing now where my face hath been,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all my flesh lies soft upon the floor;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto my heart the worms have found a door,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all my body is to the worms akin;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They long time since their feasting did begin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And they shall part not from me evermore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Here lie I stretch’d out through the rotting years,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And I am surely weary of the grave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And I have sometimes thought that I might rave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And my two perish’d eyes almost shed tears.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is no one that sees and none that hears;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I shall not out from my corrupted cave.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Here now forever with the lustful worms</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I lie within my putrid sunken sty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And through eternity my soul shall die.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O thou toward whom all my dead spirit squirms!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forevermore I love thee through all terms</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Until the dead stars rot in the black sky.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="mummy" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Mummy</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Thou art at last made perfect; from the estate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of mushy life Death hath thee petrified.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The soft the flowing and the putrified</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That made thee up, is by that artist great</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now crystalliz’d unto a changeless state.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That thing thou walkedst, nos’d and ear’d and eyed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eternally severely doth abide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sunk from the bands of them that drank and ate.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Green mummies walk above thy walled gloom,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unripen’d mummies; they intemperate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seek in life’s beauty their high-crowned doom</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In vain. But thee no passion doth illume</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stiff in the musked darkness of the tomb</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hard in stiff bands of red and nacarat.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="sepulchral-life" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Sepulchral Life</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Lo, all the world as some vast corpse long dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fadeth and perisheth and doth decay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even as a corpse, in whose unhonor’d clay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The worms have long the inmost secrets read;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Even as a corpse, upon whose lowly head</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sun beats, and the holy rain doth play;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even as a corpse, whereof the people say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>—We would that these dead bones were buried.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Even so: and in the earth’s vast sepulchre</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our fainting souls their doubtful footsteps bear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dreaming of that which no dead men may see;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And in our passage to the second death,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We whisper strange names with our pesty breath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Love, and Honour, and great Victory.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="corpse" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Corpse</h3>
				<p>
					<span>A dead corpse crowned with a crown of gold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sits thron’d beneath the sky’s gigantic pall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gold garments from its rotted shoulders fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And regal purple robes funereal.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Before its face a vast processional</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Goes by with offerings for its great knees cold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its soft hand doth a golden sceptre hold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in its flesh lie sleeping worms uproll’d.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They that pass ceaseless by see not at all;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They know not that beneath its garments’ fold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is but a corpse, rotted, and dead, and tall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He is accurst that sees it dead and old;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He is accurst that sees: the white worms call</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For him: for him have funeral dirges toll’d.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="mankind" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Mankind</h3>
				<p>
					<span>They do not know that they are wholly dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor that their bodies are to the worm given o’er;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They pass beneath the sky forevermore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With their dead flesh the earth is cumbered.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Each day they drink of wine and eat of bread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And do the things that they have done before;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet their hearts are rotten to the core,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from their eyes the light of life is fled.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Surely the sun is weary of their breath;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They have no ears, and they are dumb and blind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Long time their bodies hunger for the grave.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>How long, O God, shall these dead corpses rave?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When shall the earth be clean of humankind?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When shall the sky cease to behold this death?</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="the-defilers" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Defilers</h3>
				<p>
					<span>O endless idiocy of humankind!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O blatant dead that howl and scream and roar!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O strange dead things the worms have gambled for!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O dull and senseless, foolish, mad and blind!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>How long now shall your scent defile the wind?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How long shall you make vile the earth’s wide floor?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How long, how long, O waiting ages hoar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall the white dawn their gaping faces find?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O vile and simple, blind of heart and mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When shall your last wave roll forevermore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Back from the sick and long-defiled shore?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When shall the grave the last dead carcass bind?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O shameless humankind! O dead! O dead!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When shall your rottenness be buried?</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="the-grotesques" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Grotesques</h3>
				<section id="the-grotesques-1">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h4>
					<p>
						<span>I saw a dead corpse lying in a tomb,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Long buried and rotten to the core;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Behold this corpse shall know not evermore</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Aught that may be outside its wormy room;</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>It lies uncover’d in the pesty gloom,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Eyeless and earless, on the charnel-floor,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>While in its nameless corpse the wormlets hoar</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Make in its suppurated brain their room.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>And in that charnel that no lights illume,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It shriek’d of things that lay outside its door;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And while the still worms through its soft heart bore,</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>It lay and reason’d of the ways of doom,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And in its head thoughts mov’d as in a womb;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And in its heart the worms lie evermore.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="the-grotesques-2">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h4>
					<p>
						<span>I saw a dead corpse in a haughty car,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whom in a high tomb phantom horses bore,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Aye to and fro upon the scatter’d floor;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His dead eyes star’d as though they look’d afar,</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>His gold wheels myriad perish’d souls did mar,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>While through his flesh the ravenous wormlets tore;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He in whose eyes the worm was conqueror,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Held his high head unmoved like a star.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>And as with loud sound and reverberant jar,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And as with splash of crusht flesh and dull roar,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The death-car thunder’d past the tomb-walls hoar,</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Within those dead dominions the dead tsar</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Receiv’d his plaudits where dead bodies are;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And in his heart the worms lie evermore.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="the-grotesques-3">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h4>
					<p>
						<span>I saw a dead corpse making a strange cry,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With dead feet planted on a high tomb’s floor;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The dead stand round, with faces that implore;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His dead hands bless them, stretched forth on high.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>—And art thou God?⁠—and art thou majesty?⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And art thou he whom all the dead adore?⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And art thou he that hath the skies in store?⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nay, nay, dead dust, dead dust, and vanity.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>And wouldst thou rise up to the lighted sky?⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nay, nay, thy limbs are rotten on the floor;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou shalt not out from thy polluted sty;</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Thou wouldst become divinity once more,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou dreamest of splendour that shall never die;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And in thy heart the worms lie evermore.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="the-grotesques-4">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h4>
					<p>
						<span>I saw a dead corpse lying on the floor</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of a tomb; worms were in its woman’s head,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Its black flesh lay about it shred on shred,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And the dead things slept in its bosom hoar.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>And evermore inside that loathed door,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It turn’d itself as one upon a bed,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It turn’d itself as one whom sleep hath fled,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As one that the sweet pangs of passion bore.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>And from its passionate mouth’s corrupted sore,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And from its lips that are no longer red,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Came forth love’s accents; and it spake, and said.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>—The Pleiades and night’s noon-hours are o’er,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And I am left alone in wearyhead.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And in its heart the worms lie evermore.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
			</article>
			<article id="dead-dialogue" epub:type="z3998:drama">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Dead Dialogue</h3>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">1st Corpse</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I would now that the sweet light of the sun</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Might once again shine down upon my face;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So weary am I of my rottenness.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">2nd Corpse</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Rejoice that now at least thou art done with life;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This thing shall nevermore return.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">1st Corpse</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span class="i15">At last</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My body is aweary of the tomb;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It is a hundred years since in the grave</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I have lain down between four narrow walls,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shut up with putrid darkness and the worm.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There is no flesh upon my body now,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That was so long a-rotting; on my shelf</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Here am I now nothing but stinking bones,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That have had life beneath the face of the sun.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">3rd Corpse</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span><em>I</em> am not yet utterly putrified,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And the worms yet within my flesh abound;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I do repent me that I did not learn</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What life was, while I liv’d beneath the sun⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>At least then I might think of what I had done;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But I am rotten, and I have not liv’d.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">1st Corpse</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<span>I would that I might leave this place of ordure</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And look once more upon the face of the world,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Where the sun is.</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">2nd Corpse</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span class="i12">O foolish ragged-bones,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wouldst thou show forth thy dripping excrements,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And shredded rottenness to the face of day?⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Stink and be still, and leave us here in peace.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">1st Corpse</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Envy me not, O stench, slop-face, dung-eyes;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My bones are clean and dry as the tomb’s walls,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And stink not; as for thee, thou art a sink.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">2nd Corpse</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Envy me not, thou, that I am so sweet</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The black worms love me; hungry were that worm</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That on thee preys.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">4th Corpse</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Be silent, both ye dead and rotten things;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lo I, that was unburied yesterday,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Am fair and smooth and firm, and almost sweet;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If that I were not dead, one might me love.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">3rd Corpse</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Is it so sweet a thing, this love, this love?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">2nd Corpse</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Thy lips are green for kissing, and streaks of black</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Streak over thee where the worms have not yet been!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">4th Corpse</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ha, ha, I know wherefore thou speakest so:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Because thy torture is too great for thee,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And the worms’ gnawing, and thy body’s rottenness,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And the rottenness in thy bones and in thy brain!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">1st Corpse</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O beautiful, O dead, O spit upon,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He speaketh well that is but lately dead;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy flesh lies all along thee like green slime,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O pudding gravied in thine own dead sauce!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">2nd Corpse</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Rotten one!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">1st Corpse</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span class="i5">Dung-heap!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">2nd Corpse</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span class="i10">Dead one!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">1st Corpse</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span class="i15">Beast! beast! beast!</span>
									<br/>
									<span><em>Therefore</em> perhaps, thou art so early dead?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">2nd Corpse</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>They say that those thou lovedst were not men,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O goat-face⁠—Shall I say what was thy death?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">4th Corpse</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Come, come, my brothers, be not so slanderous;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We have all been the same upon the earth.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">3rd Corpse</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Thou sayest true, new brother.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">1st Corpse</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span class="i15">Thou sayest true.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">2nd Corpse<br/>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside.</i></td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I shall not suffer anything any more;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I have left all that; I am evermore releas’d;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I shall not struggle and suffer any more;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This seemeth strange and very sweet to me;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And I shall grow accustom’d to the worms.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">5th Corpse</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Rejoice not thou, that thou art fallen</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Into a pit where people leave their dung;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There is no reason here for any joy.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sepulchre</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Be silent, now, ye spindle-shankèd dead!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ye will learn to be silent when y’are here</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For a long time; ye always spout and roar,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>At first, before the time of rottenness;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But so I suppose it must be⁠—y’are not the first,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And ye shall not be the last; so fast i’ the world,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So eagerly they are begotten, and they die,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And they are begotten again; just for this end</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hideously propagated evermore.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">A voice above singing</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Golden is the sunlight,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When the daylight closes,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Golden blow the roses</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ere the spring is old;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>All thy hair is golden,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Falling long and lowly</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Round thy bosom holy;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And thy heart is of fine gold!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</article>
			<article id="fragments" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Fragments</h3>
				<section id="fragments-1">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h4>
					<p>
						<span>And since I understood not what so strong</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Driveth all these at such exstatic pace,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">I too went down and joined in the throng;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And many sitting in a lowly place</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">I saw, where sense and vision darkness clogs,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">With one flat-breasted wife with munched face</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And bestial litter as of rats or hogs;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">These are all they that eat and multiply</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">In the same manner with low apes and dogs;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Like these they live and like these they shall die.</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">—Pass thou from these, said then to me that voice,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And heed not thou the stinking of that sty.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then saw I them that did with wine rejoice,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Crowning their heads with roses of the earth;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">I too sat down and joined in that noise,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But ask’d me soon⁠—Why do all these have mirth?</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">From these I past, weary of myrrh and wine.</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Others apart whose spirits had more dearth</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sat solitary as who would fain divine,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Of seeing and of hearing ill content;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">With these I sat, half drunken with the vine,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And sick of visions that aye came and went;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">But all the knowledge that their striving found</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Was but one vision more than wine had sent;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All these also shall moulder in the ground.</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">From these I past as from dead flesh and bones.</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Then came I where the kings of earth sat crown’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Neath purple canopies on golden thrones;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">These offer’d me part in that changeless state,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Until my soul wearied of brass and brônze.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Others whose sweating nothing could abate</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Kingdoms and cities build and overthrow,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Till my soul wonder’d at the striving great</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of all the puppets in that puppet-show:</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">—Doth the string move them with such urgency,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">That all their limbs such strange grimaces show?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>—These are all they that do, one made reply;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">In all their actions never could I find</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">What they were doing these things for nor why.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From these I past as from the deaf and blind,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And ever as I went the solemn brawl</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Of all these mad and idiot howl’d behind.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I came to those that ceased not to call.</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The world unto them, shouting o’er and o’er;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">My heart knew not why these so loudly bawl;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And some stood round with faces that implore,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Asking for peace; and ever those that gave</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Did but like these delude themselves the more;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But rottenness shall stop all these that rave.</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Last, some there were that did with vanity</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Toil ever with unwearied hands to save</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And to eternize all things great and high;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">With these I stay’d, till my heart questioned:</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">—What are the things thou doëst here and why?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whereat all these became as persons dead.</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Then I arose from among these the last,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And follow’d then where’er my footsteps led;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And among them that reigned then I past,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And among them that ever fain would know,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And among them whose lot with wine was cast;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I past the prophets and the puppet-show,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And among them that joy’d in marble and in song,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And all that Seven tir’d of long ago.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And is this all the meaning of that throng,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">This all, O heart, that wast of seeing fain,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">But like a circle that still seemeth long</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Because it goeth round and round again?</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Not in all these doth any reason hide</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">No more than in the words of the insane.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There is no ground for sorrow; nor in pride</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">For pride; nor in them that in gladness sate;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Wherefore with none of these shall I abide.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The sought is vanity; the seeking great</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Vanity; the not-seeking vanity;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">For none of these change I my solemn state.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="fragments-2">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h4>
					<p>
						<span>Then since no one could answer unto me</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The question, and since no one could me tell</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The wherefore of this endless Vanity</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of all the spirits that on earth did dwell,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">I said⁠—I go unto the Absolute;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">He will perchance release me from this hell.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Him that made noisy what before was mute</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">I found upon a heap of filthy dung</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Low-sitting in the fashion of the brute.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In strange grimaces still his face he wrung,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Up to the chin within that filth immerst,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Which still his busy hands about him flung.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>—Do thou those clothes wherein he is inhearst</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Take off, said I to one, and do not shirk.</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">He did, while still that being howl’d and curst.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For there so thick and muddy was the murk,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And he still bore of clothes so thick a weight,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">I knew not well what thing therein did lurk.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Three coverings then that one removed straight⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Omniscience, Omnipresence, Omnipotence,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">From off the thing that in the ordure sate.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then did his truth show clear to every sense,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">A filthy idiot so foul and low,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">That decency the perfect tale prevents.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And I⁠—O thou whose nakedness doth show</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Like one not in the womb to fulness brought,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Why are all things that are; if thou dost know?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then he replied from out the ordure hot:</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">—Brahma, great Brahma, Everlasting, I!</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And I⁠—Not such reply my question sought.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Answer thou me! And he still made reply:</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">—Brahma, great Brahma! repetition vain.</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">I asked again: and⁠—Brahma! he did cry.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then one thereby to me⁠—Why art thou fain</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">
							<span>Knowledge to have from It?</span>
							<span>It knows not, It;</span>
						</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Why seek for truth among the low insane?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then he that did within the ordure sit</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Out of the filth that lay about his feet</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Such things as children make with little wit</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Made, and then broke, and did the act repeat.</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">—I have made all the worlds, he gibbered;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And I his labour with these words did greet.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>—Why dost thou these things? why, O why? I said.</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">No word vouchsaf’d the mouth of him that stank,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">But giggling sounds and idiot uttered.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then seated in that place of ordure rank,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">With his two lips he made a cackling sound,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And back within the friendly ordure sank.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then I with a great sad and awful voice</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Cried out⁠—O thou that rottest in this sty,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">O thou whose soul in ordure doth rejoice,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What art thou doing these things for and why?</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Then one to me⁠—His bliss is not to know</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The infiniteness of his own Vanity;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Therefore the soul of him that stinketh so,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Because his sense is blind and deaf and mad</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Forever, knoweth not eternal woe.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Lo from the first his soul no reason had;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">He thinketh he himself is everything,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">
							<span>And nothing is but him!</span>
							<span>He is not sad.</span>
						</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ignorance, ignorance, shrouds him like a pall;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Therefore thus low upon the fetid floor</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">He sits, and knoweth naught outside his stall.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And I⁠—He maketh naught outside his store.</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Why doth he this? and in this fetid tomb</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Sitteth he here in madness evermore?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>How long shall iron, awful, gnashing doom</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Leave him thus naked old and idiot</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Blind deaf and stinking, in the loathed gloom</span>
						<br/>
						<span>How long shall This within the ordure squat?</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">How long shall This cease not to beck and nod?</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">How long shall This cease not to rot and rot?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And he⁠—This rottenness that seemeth God</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">More woe than this nor any other mode</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Shall know not, till It ceaseth in the sod.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And as a gnat, a viper, or a toad,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Because its nature is not infinite,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">It too shall perish in the worm’s abode;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Till then It suppurateth in the night.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="fragments-3">
					<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h4>
					<p>
						<span>Then from the world I turn’d my steps afar;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">I came there where the holy Trinity</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And all the blessed saints in glory are,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And did the beatific vision see,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And how those happy are that once did mourn;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">But my heart said⁠—All this is naught to me;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor knew I why all these should be reborn.</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Where moon-fac’d houris wanton arms do fling</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Round Mahmud’s blessed, I past by in scorn,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For my heart dream’d a deeper revelling.</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Then came I to that banquet more divine</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">That Jayadeva and that Jami sing;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And the fair goblet fill’d full of the wine</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Brought the cup-bearer clad with wantonness;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And there with the beloved and the vine</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My heart grew weary of that blessedness.</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">From life I past, finding no joy therein.</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">The vision and the vine and drunkenness</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Still like a circle ever closing in.</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Then I departed to the final peace,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Sick of what is and shall be and hath been,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Brahma, as the drop sinks in the seas:</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">I past out from the bonds of thee-and-me,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Lost in that Infinite whose being is</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Glory in all things and reality;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">But therein I that was not I, alas</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">In that deliverance from me-and-thee</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where all illusion fadeth like to grass,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Found naught that equall’d my undimm’d desire;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">—If that reality then real was,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What is that real more than trodden mire?</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Then from all being did my spirit pass,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Sick of all being whether low or higher.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Out of that circle unto nothingness</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">I came, unto Nirvana, the far goal</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Of many a holy saint, where visions cease;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But nothingness did not my heart console.</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Ah not in nothingness is any peace,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Nor in peace any peace, nor in the whole,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor in the vine nor in the vision, nor</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">In being nor non-being, nor in all</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">That man hath dream’d of and hath anguisht for.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nay not in joy nor the vine jovial,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Nor in the perfume of the lov’d one’s breath,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Nay nor in anything anywhere at all;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor in illusion; nor what sundereth</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Illusion; in the sundering of that chain</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">There is no joy; and not alas in death</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Find I that thing whereof my soul is fain.</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">All these things also are all vanity</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">No less than sun and stars that wax and wane</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Forever in the everlasting sky.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
			</article>
			<article id="envoi" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Envoi</h3>
					<p epub:type="subtitle">At the End of the Century</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>
					<span>Now I am come to the nadir at last, to the absolute sorrow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now all the stars are gone out of my sky;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Night everlasting is mine without hope or desire of the morrow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All my life’s hopes are gone tombwards to die.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All my life’s glories lie perisht around me; and lo with great laughing</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Laugh I out loud, and I care not at all;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here with mine Anguish, my Sorrow, my Madness, my Grief, I sit quaffing</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wine, in high state in my echoing hall.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This is the last night I drink with you, maniac wassailers dreary!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lift up your goblets and drink ere I go!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo, I am easily bor’d, I am easily tired and made weary;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now at the last I am weary of Woe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo, I that walk in the flower crown’d season of youthfulness golden,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Think ye that all things my gladness can slay?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sorrow is fitting for dotards and them that are loathsome and olden;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1"><em>I</em> am as one that goes ever away.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo, I laugh out at Grief, lo, I laugh in unending rejoicing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I that have nightshade entwin’d in my hair;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heart of me, what dost thou here in the wearisome darkness, revoicing</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yesterday’s stale and forgotten despair?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now it is midnight; but soon shall the wakening glory of morning</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shine in the East, when the darkness is gone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now in my spirit that sat for a time in the darkness of mourning</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Waketh in gladness the mystical dawn.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>New spring laugheth without⁠—to thy heart it is calling! and o’er thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Soon shall the banners of dawn be unfurl’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wait thou no longer, O heart, O heart that art strong, for before thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lieth the pomp of the great high world!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now it is midnight; my Anguish, my Mourning, my Sadness, my Sorrow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Crown you with nightshade, and once more with me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Drink and make merry; farewell! I am here with you now; on the morrow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sail I over the mighty sea.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
