<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Postlude</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="postlude" epub:type="epilogue">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Postlude</h2>
			<article id="song-of-india" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Song of India</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Now at the last, Zulaikha, all my sorrows olden</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are farther off than Europe or than China seem,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And like an idle dream</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The North is faded far off in the distance golden;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And here with thee I sit in perfect peace enfolden</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beside the Ganges-stream.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Full well I knew that ne’er those northern promontories</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could give to me the dream that did my soul desire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For there my heart did tire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For always me allur’d the strangely whisper’d stories</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of skies that burn with more consuming languid glories,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And suns of mightier fire.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I dream’d of heavier suns than burn in skies of ours,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And heavier airs that through the long long evening swoon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under a larger moon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And heavier-scented gardens fill’d with stranger flowers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And tropic palms that wave through all the long long hours</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of endless afternoon.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At last now from that northern dream am I awoken,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At last I am come home over the watery main;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Long long I sigh’d in vain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now under tropic palms I lie in peace unbroken,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And mine own land I see, beloved, and hear spoken</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My natal tongue again.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Zulaikha, past is all the longing and endeavour;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The palm-trees sleep, and sleeping move not any leaf;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perisht is woe and grief;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stilly the padmas float upon the holy river;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among all these we two with languid eyes forever</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lie sunk in endless kief.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Before us riseth white our marble-builded palace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou hast let fall from out thy hands that weary are</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The volume of Attár.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy hand hath spill’d the wine within the silver chalice;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the river winding through the distant valleys</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sleepeth the nénufar.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>From out the oleanders languid slumber steepeth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thou, Zulaihka, dost, in rest too deep for dream,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like one enchanted seem;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy beauty now in waking slumber sunken sleepeth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And dreaming past thy wholly closëd eyelids creepeth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sleepy-flowing stream.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thou hast the light of Asia in thy face divinest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in thy scented mouth and in thy lotus-eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O wine of Paradise!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O moon-fac’d love that by the sacred stream reclinest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath this world anything for which in vain thou pinest?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That thing shall be thy prize.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The caravans that in the desert, heavy-laden,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By unknown oases pitch their sun-blacken’d tents,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall bring thee all sweet scents</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherein delight in heaven the houris ever-maiden⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Patchouli, nard, and myrrh, from many a distant aden</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of heavenly indolence.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>All kinds of gems wherefore thine almond eyes have yearning,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In heaps, wherein to bathe thy beauties languorous,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O maiden amorous,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They shall bring home to thee from distant isles returning⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pearl, sapphire, diamond, topaz, and ruby burning,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And opal luminous.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thou art that sweet whereof all poets dead have chaunted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore my soul hath sought thy face o’er pathless seas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here to have endless peace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou art the garden of delight with slumber haunted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy perfume maketh dream of desert lands enchaunted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And far-off oases.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thou hast that beauty in thine all-consuming glances</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That openeth the ways to far enchanted skies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in thy lotus-eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou hast the light that shineth in the countenances</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of them whose eyes have seen the glory which entrances</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The blest of Paradise.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thou art all sweets that unto perfect joy devote us,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In thee all spices and all scents together come,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O lute that now art dumb!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou art musk, frankincense, amomum, stephanotis,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou art the fragrant wine, the paradisal lotus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou art the opium.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Hashsheesh nor opium are worth not thy caresses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sweeter than opium to still the spirit’s drouth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thine unassuaged mouth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Him that hath known thy love no mortal grief distresses;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sweeter thy kisses are than incense which oppresses</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The breezes of the South⁠ ⁠…</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At last I am come home, come home; and all regretting</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is with the North afar from thee and me away.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Behold O love, the day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is past, in Indian skies the holy sun is setting;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mûzin from his tower calleth unforgetting,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The faithful ones to pray.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Under the velvet night wide Indiä reposes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now in the scented dark the champak odours swoon;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Slowly the summer moon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Riseth into the azure night made drunk with roses;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lo the camel-bells, now that the daylight closes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tinkle their quiet tune.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Behold, O well-beloved, ’neath the moonlight gleaming</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The travellers depart from out the sleeping khan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O perfume Asiän!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And past the moonlit palace, where we two lie dreaming,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With camels and with horsemen like to shadows seeming</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Departs the caravan.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>It is the starting hour, O most melancholy!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In long procession underneath the moon’s pale gleams,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like something that but seems,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The caravan departeth to the desert slowly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There far afar to seek through endless time the holy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mirages of their dreams.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<article id="dedication-2" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Dedication</h3>
				<p>
					<span>These paltry rhymes, which loftier shall pursue</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than aught America of high or great</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath seen since first began her world-wide state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I dedicate, my brother, unto you.</span>
				</p>
			</article>
			<section id="ite-missa-est">
				<p>ITE MISSA EST</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
