<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Prelude</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/se.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter">
		<section id="prelude" epub:type="prologue z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Prelude</h2>
			<p>
				<span>I am a little tired of all things mortal;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I see through half-shut eyelids languorous</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The old monotonous</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gold sun set slowly through the western portal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where I recline upon my deep dîwân,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Ispahân.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I am a little weary of the Persian</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Girl that I lov'd; I am quite tir'd of love;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I am weary of</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The smoking censers, and the sweet diversion</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of stroking Leila's jasmine-scented hair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I thought so fair.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>At last I think I am quite tired of beauty;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why do the stars shine always in the sky?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I think if I might die,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Something more sweet, less tiring than the duty</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of kissing her, might be; I am tired of myrrh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And kissing her.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Khaled, come, come, and slowly move the scented</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gold narghilé away; let the lyres cease.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now a little peace!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For see, moon-faced Leila hath repented</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of singing Hafiz' songs melodiously,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And languidly.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Surely all things are vain, and great thanksgiving</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is due not; surely all things now are vain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all my heart is fain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of something, something, far too great for living;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nothing is very sad, nor wonderful,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor beautiful.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Well now, since all things are not worth the winning,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Goodbye! With these I have a little play'd;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And once, alas, I pray'd</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That gorgeous, golden sins be mine for sinning;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But now I would not leave my palanquin</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For any sin.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And long ago I prov'd in great compassion</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For man, that Brahm is not nor ever was;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But now, alas, alas</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I would he were, that in the olden fashion</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I might laugh once again ere all is said;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Brahm is dead.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then with philosophy I bor'd me duly;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And since I could not slumber all the time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I, in sweet golden rhyme,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On white papyrus scented with patchouli</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wrote masterpieces starry-beautiful.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The earth was full.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>So beauty wearied me; in order slowly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Love, Joy, and Victory came unto me;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I kiss'd them languidly;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Virtue came, and Duty, stiff and holy;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To these I said—Pray come another day;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And turn'd away.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now since of all I am a little weary,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And since on earth I must a while sojourn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And since a while must burn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The censer of my long existence dreary,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All things shall walk, that own my mastery,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In luxury.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>My Ennui shall in vestments falling lowly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stiff, purple, trailing, long, episcopal</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sweep through her palace hall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like to a consecrated bishop holy;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My Sin from golden goblets of Byzant</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall drink absinthe.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And my gold-crowned wanton goddess Pleasure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(My candles are all burning at her shrine)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall be made drunk with wine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And walk unto the velvet-falling measure</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of golden-voiced, solemn-sounding shawms.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No rhyme for shawms.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>All they that wait upon me in my glory,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My purple Pride, and my Luxuriousness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And my Voluptuousness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall show within their faces transitory</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Something more subtile than all life can give,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While I shall live....</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ah, all is liv'd, all eaten, all is drunken!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soul, is there anything now left for thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Excepting sanctity?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Nay, ev'n we too have been in virtue sunken,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We have been holy priest, we have confess'd,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Said, <i>Missa Est</i>.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I have drunk out of heavy goblets golden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As from some hellish tabernaculum</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cannabis, conium;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I know quite all the poisons, all the olden</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sins, all the ténébreux dark secrets hid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And things forbid.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I have had all things unto mortals given,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I all the women, all the passion I,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the satiety;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have had all the pleasures known in heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Paradisiacal, purpureal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Exstatical.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>With all the sciences I am acquainted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alas! I know quite all the languages,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the philosophies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alas! and all the pictures that are painted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all the palac'd capitals that be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have wearied me.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Alas, all art, all knowledge, and all passion</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have had: I have heard all the symphonies;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have sail'd all the seas;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have drain'd all life's cup in languid fashion;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I am come to Persia again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Land of cocagne.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
